{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat\deflang4105{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}{\f1\fnil Calibri;}}
{\colortbl ;\red0\green0\blue255;}
{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.14393}\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\sa200\sl240\slmult1 {\f0\fs18\lang9{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK http://wiki.ultimacodex.com/wiki/Ultima_VI_Transcript }}{\fldrslt{http://wiki.ultimacodex.com/wiki/Ultima_VI_Transcript\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs18\par
\par
Britain\par
\par
Tholden\par
Introduction : a preoccupied man holding a ledger under one arm. "Records to keep, festivals to plan, I'm so busy... But I can spare you a moment, <Gender>."\par
name : "I am Tholden von Bazillius, Chancellor to Lord British."\par
"In my younger days, I was known as 'The Werecat of the Wine Cellar'..."\par
were,cat,wine,cell,youn : "I could tell you stories... But there's no time for that now."\par
lord,brit : "A fine ruler indeed. 'Tis a pleasure to keep his kingdom running smoothly for him."\par
job : "All the little details of governing, all the paperwork falls on my shoulders."\par
"Someone must do it, and yet I miss the days when I was a carefree adventurer."\par
rune,mant,comp : "The rune and mantra of Compassion are in the keeping of the bards at the Conservatory."\par
"I entrusted them with the rune due to their compassionate nature."\par
"As for the other runes - they are no longer together, as they were when the Codex was recovered."\par
"Since then, they have become scattered throughout the land. Each was sent to a town near its shrine."\par
"If thou dost ask the lords of each of these towns, they should be able to tell thee more."\par
"The towns are Moonglow, Jhelom, Yew, Minoc, Trinsic, Skara Brae, and New Magincia."\par
code : "'Tis the greatest treasure in all the realm."\par
cons : "'Twas founded by Lord British."\par
bye : If female : Tholden goes down on one knee and kisses your hand. "I hope I have been of assistance, <Gender>."\par
If male : Tholden bows deeply. "I hope I have been of assistance, <Gender>."\par
other : "I cannot help thee with that."\par
Kenneth\par
Introduction : a lively bard with laughter in his eyes.\par
"Welcome, <Gender>! I am Sir Kenneth, and I'd gladly play a song for thee."\par
name : "Kenneth's my name - don't wear it out."\par
ken : "I asked you not to wear it out! It's the only name I've got."\par
job,teac,lear : "My wife and I teach young bards the arts of composition, performance, and improvisation."\par
"We also give concerts on occasion."\par
perf,impr,compo,conc : "Bards must be well versed in such matters."\par
wife : "Her name is Nan. Whatever you do, don't say anything to her about spiders..."\par
nan,spid : "She has quite an imagination. Sometimes she lets it carry her away."\par
imag : "Usually it doesn't give her any trouble."\par
comp : "Yes, I know of the Rune and Mantra of Compassion."\par
mant : "I've been trying to work the Mantra of Compassion into a song - but I don't know what 'mu' means."\par
mu : "Dost thou know what it means?"\par
no-"Nobody I know does either."\par
yes-"Tell me, what does it mean?"\par
"Hmmmm... No, I don't think that's it."\par
rune : "Ariana has the rune, and they could hardly have found a sweeter child to give it to."\par
aria,swee,chil : "Once in a great while a student comes along with such a gift for learning that one need but offer a little guidance and step back to watch them learn."\par
"To have such students is the most rewarding part of a teacher's job, and Ariana is one such."\par
song,music : "Kenneth plays a delightful little melody for you.\par
bye : "Until we meet again."\par
other : "I like the confused look on your face too much to ruin it by telling you."\par
Nan\par
Introduction : a nervous young bard.\par
"I would play for thee, but I'm worried about my lute."\par
name : "I am Lady Nan."\par
job : "Why, making music, of course."\par
musi : "With my lute."\par
play,worr,lute,musi : "Every time I pick up my lute, spiders crawl out of it."\par
"There must be hundreds of them nesting in there!"\par
spid,nest,craw,hund : "I hate spiders! They're creepy, ugly, disgusting things! Why won't they leave me alone?"\par
If Iolo in party : Iolo says to her, "Now, now, my dear. Have you forgotten about the gloves I gave you?"\par
"Oh, yes. Perhaps if I wore those I could play..."\par
glov : "Iolo gave them to me for my birthday."\par
comp : "Yes, I know of the Rune and Mantra of Compassion."\par
mant : "The Mantra of Compassion is 'mu.' Is that a spider on your shoulder?"\par
"No, 'tis just a trick of the light."\par
rune : "'Twas given to our most promising student, young Ariana."\par
aria : "She's very talented. She'll go far, if the spiders don't get her..."\par
bye : "Fare thee well, and watch thy step! The spiders are lurking everywhere."\par
other : "I cannot help thee with that."\par
Ariana\par
Introduction : a cute little girl with short hair.\par
Initial visit : "My parents told me never to talk to strangers. What's your name?"\par
"Ok. Now I can talk to you!"\par
Subsequent visits : "Oh, hello again."\par
name : She curtsies gracefully. "Ariana is my name."\par
job : "I'm learning to be a bard. I like to play the harpsichord best."\par
bard : "I want to be a bard when I grow up. They have more fun than anybody!"\par
comp : "They taught me all about compassion. They say it's very important for bards."\par
mant : "I can't remember it now... And Kenneth just taught it to me last week..."\par
"Wait, I know! It's 'mo!'"\par
"Or maybe it was 'om'... Or 'mu,' or 'um'... It was something like that."\par
rune : Already have rune : "I already gave it to you, silly. I hope you can figure out how to use it."\par
Ariana has rune, first time : "I have the Rune of Compassion. Isn't it pretty?" She reaches into her pocket and takes it out to show you.\par
"Do you need it for something?"\par
no-"Ok."\par
yes-"Are you on an important quest?"\par
no-"I'd best hold onto it then. I was told to look after it carefully."\par
yes-"I'm not supposed to let anyone else have it. But if you truly need it..."\par
"I don't know what I should do."\par
"I know! My parents run the Blue Boar Tavern. Go ask them if you can borrow the rune."\par
"If they say 'tis okay, I'll give it to you."\par
Ariana has rune, subsequent times : "Hi! Did you get permission from my parents to borrow the rune?"\par
yes, full-"Oh, you're carrying too much right now. You'd better come back for it later."\par
yes-"Then here you are." She hands you the rune. "I wish you the best of luck on your quest."\par
no-"Well, if you get their permission later, let me know."\par
song,music,play,harp : "I've been studying to be a bard since I was this many." She holds up three fingers.\par
"I'd like to play something for you, but I'm not good enough yet."\par
She looks away for a moment, then turns back to you, blushing slightly.\par
"Will you come back to hear my music when I am older, if you can?"\par
no-The little girl sniffles, seeming suddenly on the verge of tears.\par
"I'm sorry," she says, "I shouldn't have asked." She turns her back, as if ashamed to face you.\par
yes-The little girl's face breaks out into a smile bright enough to light up the whole room.\par
"Really? I would like that very much."\par
fun : "Oh yes, lots of it!"\par
ken : "He's my teacher."\par
bye : "See you later."\par
other : "What do you mean?"\par
Matt\par
Introduction : a gaunt fellow, with eyes that take in everything and reveal nothing.\par
When you address him, the man replies with gestures that appear to be some kind of sign language.\par
When he sees that you can't understand him, he shrugs his shoulders and returns to his duties.\par
If Dupre in party : Dupre puts his hand on your shoulder and whispers\par
"Matt here had a most unfortunate accident as a child, and it left him deaf and dumb.\par
I'd suggest you ask his wife instead, <Avatar Name>."\par
Anya\par
Introduction : a buxom woman who looks hard working, yet contented.\par
Not working : "I'm sorry, <Gender>, but I've just an hour to myself today."\par
"I'll gladly talk with thee later."\par
Working : "Good , <Gender>, and welcome to the Blue Boar Tavern. Art thou here for business or pleasure?"\'b0\par
Previous purchase : "Anything else I can do for thee?"\par
name : "I am Anya."\par
gyps : "They pass by Britain occasionally. I believe they travel on the King's Way."\par
king,way : "The King's Way is the oldest road in Britain."\par
job,work : "I run this tavern to support my family. The hours are long, but my husband offers what help he can."\par
"We make enough to pay for my daughter's schooling, so 'tis all worthwhile."\par
fami,supp : "My husband Matt, and my daughter Ariana."\par
husb,matt : "He had an accident as a child which left him deaf and dumb, but I love him all the same."\par
"I only wish he could hear our daughter play, just once."\par
"But 'twill ne'er come to pass. He lives in a world of eternal silence."\par
acci,deaf,dumb,wish,sile\par
Her face brightens suddenly. "You have the look of one who practices the art of magic."\par
"Perhaps thou couldst find some spell that might restore my husband's hearing!"\par
"I know 'tis a lot to ask, but wilt thou try?"\par
yes-"Oh, thank you, <Gender>" no-Her look of hope changes to one of sorrow as she looks down at the floor to hide her embarrassment.\par
"I'm sorry to have bothered thee," she says. "I'm sure thou hast more important things to do."\par
daug,aria : "Ariana is the light of my life. Seems she had scarce learned to walk when she first showed a gift for music."\par
"She studies now with the bards at the Conservatory."\par
musi,bard,cons : "Bless their hearts for teaching her well. She'll be no tavern wench when she grows older."\par
"Perhaps she'll even be court musician to Lord British some day..."\par
mant : "Thou shouldst ask my daughter of that. Methinks the bards have taught her of it."\par
rune,comp,perm,borr : Already have permission : "I already gave thee my permission to borrow the rune!"\par
"Do thou be careful not to lose the stone or let any harm befall it. Ariana would never forgive herself."\par
No permission : If haven't asked Ariana for rune : "Ah, twas the proudest moment of my life when they awarded my dear little Ariana the Rune of Compassion."\par
"They said she was the most promising student they'd ever had at the Conservatory."\par
"I'm sure she would show thee the rune, if thou wouldst care to see it."\par
If asked Ariana for rune : "Thou dost wish to borrow the Rune of Compassion from my daughter?"\par
She pauses a while in thought.\par
"Very well--thou dost have an honest face. I grant thee my permission."\par
plea : First time : "Good! Perhaps thou might stay and talk with me a while, before I'm back about my work."\par
Subsequent times : "'Tis good to talk with thee again. Things have been slow around here since the gypsies left.\par
cake : "Which of you?"\par
<NPC Name> asks <Character Name>, "It'll be 8 gold for the cake. Is that alright?"\par
yes, no gold-"I'm sorry, but you don't have enough gold."\par
yes, no room-"You don't have room to carry it."\par
yes-<NPC Name> gives <Character Name> the cake.\par
"I hope thou dost enjoy it!"\par
no-\par
mead,ale,wine : "Which of you?"\par
"That'll be # crowns, <Character Name>. Wouldst thou like some?" yes, no gold-"I'm sorry, but you don't have enough gold."\par
yes, no room-"You don't have room to carry it."\par
yes-"Fine!" After accepting <Character Name>'s gold, <NPC Name> hands over the purchase.\par
"Enjoy your <Item Name>."\par
rati : "Which of you?"\par
"My price is 4 gold for each ration. How many do you want, <Character Name>?"\par
No room : "You haven't any room in your pack."\par
No gold : "I'm sorry, but you don't have enough gold."\par
Can afford/carry some : <NPC Name> hands the rations to <Character Name>.\par
She hands <Character Name> # mutton ration(s).\par
Can only carry some : "That's all you can carry."\par
Can only afford some : "That's all you can afford."\par
bye : "Come back any time."\par
-or- : "Well, 'tis time I was back about my work. Dishes to wash, food to cook, drinks to serve..."\par
"I thank thee for stopping by to brighten my day with thy conversation. Do thou come again."\par
buy,sell,busi : "Wouldst thou like ale, mead, wine, rations, or perhaps a cake?"\par
other : "I cannot help thee with that."\par
Gwenneth\par
a petite woman with flowing brown hair.\par
Initial visit, Iolo in party : "Iolo! And thy companions as well!"\par
"I heard rumors that you were in town!"\par
Iolo greets his former apprentice warmly.\par
"How goes business, Gwenneth?"\par
"Very well, very well indeed. Sir Geoffrey himself just placed quite a large order!"\par
"Much demand for bows these days, what with the gargoyles!"\par
Turning to you, Gwenneth says, "And what can I do for Iolo's friend(s) this fine <Time of Day>?"\par
Initial visit, no Iolo : "I recongize thee! Thou art Iolo's friend, <Avatar Name>!"\par
"What can I do for thee this fine <Time of Day>?"\par
Subsequent visits : "Hello again. What can I do for thee this fine <Time of Day>?"\par
"What'll it be next?"\par
buy : "Which of you?"\par
"Which item?"\par
"That <Item Name> costs # gold."\par
"Interested, <Character Name>?"\par
yes, full-"But 'twould make thee o'erburdened, <Character Name>!"\par
yes-"Excellent!"\par
After accepting <Character Name>'s gold, <NPC Name> hands over the <Item Name>.\par
Yes, no gold, no Iolo : "But thou hast not enough gold, <Character Name>!"\par
Yes, have Iolo, no gold, first time : "Thou hast not enough gold, <Character Name>."\par
She winks at Iolo. "But I think I can trust thee with credit, just this once!"\par
Yes, have Iolo, no gold, subsequent times : "I'm sorry, <Character Name>, but I cannot offer more credit, even to thee."\par
"The gargoyle wars make my wares much in demand!"\par
sell : Have an item for sale : "Sorry, none of you has anything I need."\par
Nothing for sale : "Aye, <Character Name> has something of interest..."\par
"Which of you?"\par
\'a2"Which item?"\par
"Will you take # gold for that <Item Name>, <Character Name>?"\par
no-"Perhaps some other time, then."\par
no-"Perhaps something else then?"\par
yes-"Done!" <NPC Name> hands <Character Name> # gold pieces and takes the <Item Name>\par
No character/Item : "Changed your mind, eh?"\par
name : "What a strange question. I'm Gwenneth, of course."\par
Iolo in party : "Just ask Iolo!"\par
Iolo not in party : "But dost thou not know Iolo?"\par
"Well, I am his former aprrentice, Gwenneth."\par
job : "Once was I Iolo's apprentice, but then he decided to retire."\par
"Now 'tis my shop, and I craft the bows sold here!"\par
"'Course, 'tis still called Iolo's Bows, out of respect for the master."\par
Iolo in party : At this, Iolo blushes humbly.\par
garg : "I hear from the soldiers that the gargoyles are fierce opponents."\par
"Some gargoyles move like the wind itself, and can strike you like lightning bolts!"\par
"The gargoyles also have a strange and terrible weapon."\par
weap : "'Tis called a boomerang, and it is a most bizarre ranged weapon."\par
"It flies out to strike its target, then returns to the hand that threw it!"\par
"Against such magic the soldiers chose to arm themselves with good, stout Britannian bows!"\par
iolo : Iolo in party : She smiles. "I would not wish to speak of Iolo amongst his friends."\par
"I might embarass him!"\par
Iolo not in party : "Nay, I really would not wish to speak of my master behind his back."\par
arro,bolt : "Aye, usually do I carry those in stock."\par
"But there has been a shortage of late, because of the gargoyle war."\par
"Go see Lynn the Fletcher, over to the north."\par
lynn : "Lynn is a fine fletcher, and usually keeps me supplied with arrows and bolts."\par
"I've none left in stock, though, since the soldiers bought them all."\par
trip : Bought triple crossbow : "I fear I had but one triple crossbow for sale."\par
"Come back in six months and I may have another."\par
Haven't bought triple crossbow : "Ah, I see thou art a discerning buyer."\par
"The triple-crossbow is a marvel to behold."\par
"This enchanted weapon fires three bolts at once!"\par
"Normally, I would not offer it for sale."\par
"But, because thy cause is important, I will allow thee--and thee only!--to buy it."\par
"But I fear I must charge 400 gold for it."\par
"Dost thou wish to buy this weapon?"\par
yes, full-"But thou cannot carry it!"\par
yes, no gold-"But thou cannot afford it!"\par
no-"It will be here, waiting for thee, if thou hast a need for it."\par
bye : Group : "Farewell, all of you."\par
Solo : "Farewell to thee!"\par
Iolo in party : "Iolo, I'll see thee again soon with thy share of this month's profits!"\par
other : "Beg pardon?"\par
Peyton\par
Introduction : a well-dressed man with a very even temper.\par
Subsequent visits : "Good <Time of Day>, friend, and welcome back to the Wayfarer's Inn!"\par
Initial visit : "Greetings, traveler, and welcome to the Wayfarer's Inn!"\par
name : "I am Peyton, and this is my place." He gestures with his hands.\par
peyt : "Did you need something?"\par
job : "I can offer you a room for the evening."\par
room,inn : "# gold for bed and breakfast. Interested?"\par
no-"Well, perhaps next time you're in town."\par
yes-You sleep in a comfortable bed...\par
You wake rested and eat a large breakfast.\par
"Good morning, and have a good day."\par
yes, no gold-You don't have enough gold for that.\par
"I'm sorry, cash in advance. That's our policy."\par
yes, group gold-Your party takes up a collection to pay for the rooms.\par
bye : "Goodbye. Take care of yourself."\par
other : "I'm sure you'll have to ask another."\par
Max (U6)\par
Introduction : a swarthy blacksmith.\par
Subsequent visits : "Hey, it'sa the Avatar. Hello again."\par
Initial visit : "Hey, and a good <Time of Day> to you."\par
"What'sa you wanta nexta?"\par
buy : "Do you wanta weapons or armor?"\par
weap,armo : Shop closed : "You to my shopa when shesa open!"\par
Shop open : "Awhich a you?"\par
"Awhicha one adese?"\par
"That <Item Name>, she'sa costa # agold."\par
"Interested, <Character Name>?"\par
yes, full-"But she'sa be making thee too heavy, <Character Name>!"\par
yes-"Hey, at'sa good!"\par
After accepting <Character Name>'s gold, <NPC Name> hands over the <Item Name>.\par
yes, no gold-"But she'sa costing too much for you, <Character Name>!"\par
no-\par
sell : Shop closed : "You to my shopa when shesa open!"\par
Have nothing to sell : "Hey, atsa real shame, but anone of you hasa anything I'ma needing."\par
Have something to sell : "Aye, <Character Name> has asomething ofa interesta..."\par
"Awhich of you?"\par
"Awhicha one adese?"\par
"Will you take # gold for that <Item Name>, <Character Name>?"\par
no, Avatar-"Perhapsa some other atime athen."\par
no, party member-"Perhaps asomethinga else athen?"\par
yes-"She'sa done!" <NPC Name> hands <Character Name> # gold pieces and takes the <Item Name>.\par
No character/Item selected : "Achanged your aminda, eh?"\par
job : "Whassamattayu, you blind or somethin'?"\par
"I makea de swords and stuff, what's it alook like I'ma doin' here?"\par
"You gotta somethin' to sell oda somethin' you wanna buy?"\par
name : "I'ma nameda Max."\par
bye : "Goodbyea to you. Come abacka soon, ah?"\par
other : "Hey, my hearing, she's notsa so good. What you say?"\par
Lazeena\par
Introduction : a sad lady with hair down to her ankles.\par
A soft jingling accompanies her silent walk.\par
Rather than talking, she sings in a voice like wind through reeds.\par
"Hail, there, <Gender>; come listen to me. I've plenty of time to sing unto thee."\par
name : "Lazeena they call me, Lazeena the Dove."\par
"From Cove I did come, 'tis a town full of love."\par
sing,job,love,dove : "'Tis the aim of my life to sing like a bird."\par
"Wouldst thou like to hear the news I've heard?"\par
yes-"Then tell me what would please thee more: a song of the sea or a rhyme of the shore?"\par
no-"To be of more help, I wish I knew just what this little bird could do."\par
rhym,shor : She sings.\par
"South of Loch Lake and north of the bay, the beautiful Shrine of Compassion doth lay."\par
"My Artagel set out to chant there one day."\par
"But still he has not returned."\par
"Was he taken by giants or headless so foul, that nary a man could contend with the smell."\par
"He should have come home weeks ago now."\par
"But still he has not returned."\par
arta : "He is a healer, you see."\par
song,sea : She sings.\par
"The Dutchman was a giant ship with masts from the largest trees."\par
"The pride of the people she was hailed, the ruler of all the sea."\par
"She sailed out of port one fine spring day, and headed for distant shores."\par
"But a britney caught her by surprise, 'twas flung against her core."\par
"The match began the grim men fought, to gather in her sails."\par
"But thunderous was the crack and lo, the mighty vessel reeled."\par
"When gentle winds danced 'cross the surf, again the followed morn."\par
"'twas nothing left of Dutchy's hull but remnants of her born."\par
"And now the tale has nothing left, but a gravesight on the floor."\par
"On the Fens o' the Dead she came to rest, ne'er to sail no more."\par
bye : "Farewell, my friend."\par
other : "I cannot help thee with that."\par
Fyodor\par
Introduction : a man in a multicolored jacket. His fingers are long and graceful.\par
Subsequent visits : "Hello again, <Gender>."\par
Initial visit : "Good <Time of Day>, <Gender>."\par
"What can I do for you?"\par
name : "My name is Fyodor. What is thy name?"\par
"Pleased to meet thee, `<Last Input>."\par
job : "I make cloth upon my loom. Perhaps you'd like to buy some."\par
buy : Store closed : "I fear I have none with me, <Gender>."\par
"Come back when I'm at my loom; I'll help thee then."\par
Store open : "Which of you?"\par
"Cloth or thread, <Character Name>?"\par
clot,thre : "It'll cost you # gold for the <Item Name>. Interested?"\par
yes, full-"You look pretty full to me."\par
yes-"Excellent!" After accepting <Character Name>'s gold, <NPC Name> hands over the <Item Name> "You'll find none better."\par
yes, no gold-"You haven't the money."\par
no, or no item selected-"That is fine <Item Name>."\par
sell : Store closed : "But I don't need wool here, <Gender>!"\par
"Come back when I'm at my loom; I'll deal with thee then."\par
Store open : No wool : "Sorry, none of you has anything I need."\par
Have wool : "Which of you?"\par
<NPC Name> turns to <Character Name> and says "Will you take 8 gold for that wool?"\par
yes-"Done!" He hands <Character Name> 8 gold pieces and takes the wool.\par
yes, has no wool-"Sorry, you haven't any wool."\par
no-"Changed your mind, eh?"\par
clot,loom : "I push the pedals with my feet--like this."\par
"Then I pull these levers."\par
"The pattern depends on which combinations of levers and pedals I move."\par
"My father's loom was not so complicated as mine. This design came from one of Lord British's old books."\par
"I work on a large new loom. The plans for it were found in one of Lord British's old books."\par
lord,brit,old,book : "Lord British treasures antiques. There is one book for which he hath offered a reward:\par
"'The Wizard of Oz.'"\par
wiza,oz : "By Master L. Frank Baum, I believe."\par
"It concerns a girl adventurer, a strange land, and a clever balloonist."\par
ball : "Are they not made of silk, in the form of a great bag?"\par
silk,bag : "'Tis a wondrous strong stuff, silk, and very light."\par
"I regret that I am not skillful enough to weave silk."\par
"In New Magincia, however, lives the silk-weaver Charlotte."\par
char : "She is the only person I know of who can weave silk."\par
bye : "May our paths cross again some day."\par
other : "That I cannot help thee with."\par
Daver\par
Introduction : a man wearing a long grey cloak.\par
He wears gloves with the fingers cut off, and carries a large hourglass with him.\par
"Good <Time of Day>, friend Avatar."\par
name : "I'm Daver McCord."\par
job : "Every hour of the day, I ring the bell a number of times."\par
bell : "According to the numbers on the hourglass, you see."\par
numb : "Well, I usually know what time it is up here in my head somehow."\par
"But just in case, I start this hourglass at sunup, turning it over every nine hours."\par
time : "It is especially important for those with shops."\par
"They know when to open for business, eat lunch, close, and that sort of thing."\par
"Another of Lord British's innovations, this bell thing."\par
avat : "You look much taller in person. Woodroffe's painting does not do you justice."\par
just : "Heh, heh. I know little of that. I'm just the bell-ringer."\par
open,busi,sort : "Hmmm. I guess that you don't keep a regular schedule, being the Avatar and all."\par
"Probably out till all hours, collecting runes and such."\par
rune : "Magical little things."\par
"There's a symbol on one side, and a letter on the other."\par
"Probably spell something out if you put 'em all on a necklace."\par
"But that hasn't been done for a long time."\par
"After the Codex of Ultimate Wisdom was brought back from the underworld, Lord British gave the runes to the lords of the eight cities."\par
eigh,citi,gave : "Let's see now." He counts them off on his fingers.\par
"Minoc, Trinsic, Jhelom, Yew, Skara Brae, Britain, Moonglow..."\par
"...Ah yes, and New Magincia. I hear each of the lords knows a mantra."\par
mant : "Haven't the foggiest what those are for."\par
"Something to do with the shrines, I think."\par
shri : "Always wanted to visit them. Never had the time."\par
"Heh, heh, heh!"\par
lord,brit : "Lord British appointed lords to rule the eight cities."\par
bye : "Until we meet again."\par
other : "Sorry, I cannot help you with that."\par
Efram\par
Introduction : a grunting and grumbling man with a large stomach.\par
Not at work : "Hrmmph! Well, I'm busy now."\par
"Hrmmph, yes, well, come back to my shop tomorrow morning/this afternoon."\par
Initial visit : "Hrmmph. Hello." His breathing is quite heavy.\par
Subsequent visits : "Hrmmph, well. Haven't we...never mind. Hrmmph."\par
"What do you need?"\par
name : "Efram the provisioner."\par
efra : "It's a nice enough name, hrmmph."\par
buy : "Which, torches, oil, gems, backpacks, bags, shovels, or powder kegs?"\par
job : "I sell torches, oil, gems, backpacks, bags, shovels, and powder kegs."\par
torc,oil,flas,gem,back,bags,shov,powd : "Which of you?"\par
<NPC Name> looks at <Character Name>. "It'll cost you # gold for each <Item Name>. How many do you want?"\par
Too many : "Come now, that's a little much don't you think?"\par
None : <NPC Name> frowns at <Character Name>. "Hrmmph. That was a fair price. Well..."\par
full : <NPC Name> looks at <Character Name>. "You haven't any room in your pack."\par
Not enough gold : <NPC Name> looks at <Character Name>. "A <Item Name> costs more gold than you have."\par
Made purchase : He hands <Character Name> # <Item Name>\\s.\par
"There ya go."\par
Can't carry all : "That's all you can carry."\par
Can't afford all : "That's all you can afford."\par
bye : "I'm glad you stopped by." He gives you a firm handshake.\par
other : "I'm sorry?"\par
-or- : "Hrmmph, well, perhaps you could ask someone else."\par
Rufus\par
Introduction : a rough and tumble man with wild, unkempt hair.\par
Not At work : "Aye, and a fine <Time of Day> to you, my friend" "I'm busy just now. Why don't ya come t'my smithy tomorrow/later today and we'll talk then."\par
Not at work : Initial visit : "Good <Time of Day>, friend\'a1"\par
Subsequent visits : "'Tis good to see thee, friend!" he says, grabbing your arm.\par
"What d'ya need?"\par
name : "Rufus the Red."\par
rufu,red : "Can ya not tell by my hair?"\par
buy : "Which of you?"\par
"It'll cost you 2 gold for the horseshoes. Interested?"\par
yes, full-"You look pretty full to me."\par
yes-"Good, good!" After accepting <Character Name>'s gold, <NPC Name> hands over the horseshoes.\par
"Those shoes will last ya."\par
yes, no gold-"You haven't enough gold!"\par
no-"You'll find none stronger."\par
job : "If you want to buy horseshoes, just ask."\par
bye,noth : "Remember to shoe yer steed often. Bye."\par
shoe : "Aye, it saves their feet from stones and such."\par
other : "I just shoe horses, sorry."\par
Nema\par
Introduction : a sleepy looking young lady.\par
She yawns as you approach. "Oh, hello there. I must have been daydreaming."\par
name : "My name is Nema. What's yours?"\par
"That's nice."\par
job : "I tend Lord British's orchard."\par
"Of course, this time of year there's not much to do, so I take a lot of naps."\par
tend,orch : "To provide fresh fruit for Lord British's banquets."\par
prov,fres,frui,banq,stop,year,king,dual,univ,expr,conc,colo : "That's the way of it."\par
lord,brit : "Long live the king! I was just a homeless orphan when he gave me this job."\par
home,orph : "My parents were killed in an earthquake."\par
"But now I have a place to live, and a job to put food on the table."\par
pare,kill,eart : "The earthquakes seem to have stopped, thank goodness."\par
"We haven't had one in well over a year now."\par
dayd : "Well, I have better dreams at night anyway."\par
nap : "To snooze, perchance to dream..."\par
"O Morpheus, I long for a taste of thy sweet oblivion!"\par
morp : "Morpheus is the King of Slumberland! I think the moon is one of his daughters."\par
slum : "It lies halfway between our fears and our desires."\par
fear,desi : "Fear and desire... What would either be without the other?"\par
moon : "She is the sweet harbinger of the night!"\par
snoo,slee,obli : "Sleep is the finest medicine, for in our dreams lie the answers to all the problems of the waking world."\par
wak,worl : "Colors never seem as vivid when I'm awake."\par
answ,prob : "Day brings questions, night brings answers."\par
"Thusly does the duality of the universe find expression in our lives."\par
ques : "What color is seven? How many is green? Could horses speak, if they wished to? These things concern me..."\par
If Dupre in party : Dupre says "Concerned? She should be committed! We have better things to do than listen to this loon."\par
nigh : "When the sun's blazing eye winks shut, and Morpheus rules the heavens."\par
dream : "I dream of castles of ice, rivers that run backwards, fairy princesses and cloud dragons."\par
"Once I dreamed that my orchard grew and grew, until I felt like a tiny bug amongst the giant plants."\par
"Sometimes everything is upside-down, or made of chocolate."\par
"I've dreamed many a strange dream, but my favorite one is....."\par
bye : She seems to have dozed off before she even heard you say goodbye.\par
other- "I had a dream about that once..."\par
-or- : "All this talking makes me sleepy..."\par
Cullen\par
Introduction : a short, dark man, covered in white flour.\par
Subsequent visits : "Hello again, my friend!"\par
Initial visit : "Hello there, my friend!"\par
As he shakes your hand enthusiastically, clouds of flour fly off his clothes.\par
name : "I'm Cullen, Cullen the Baker."\par
job : "I'd have thought that'd be obvious! I'm a baker!"\par
As he laughs heartily, more clouds of flour rise off his clothing.\par
"You can buy bakery goods from me or perhaps you have some flour to sell, eh?"\par
bake : "I bake goods for Lord British himself!" the man says proudly.\par
"If you'd like to buy some, just say the word!"\par
buy : Shop closed : "Come to my shop when it's open!"\par
Shop open : "Which of you?"\par
No character selected : "Suit yourself."\par
Character selected : "Which item?"\par
No item selected : "Suit thyself, <Character Name>, but thou'lt find no better!"\par
Item selected : "Those cost # gold each."\par
"How many do you want, <Character Name>?"\par
none : "Suit thyself, but thou'lt find no better!"\par
Large number : "Whoa! Don't buy out my entire stock!"\par
Can't carry all : "Thou canst not carry that many!"\par
"I will sell thee just # <Item Name>(s)."\par
Can't carry any : "But thou canst not carry any <Item Name>s!"\par
Can't afford all : "Thou hast not enough gold for that many!"\par
"I will sell thee just # <Item Name>(s)."\par
Can't afford any : "But thou canst not afford any <Item Name>!"\par
If bought item : "Here's thy <Item Name>\f1\'9b\'82 plus one for luck!"\par
"How about something else, <Character Name>?"\par
no, solo-"Perhaps some other time, then."\par
no, group-"Perhaps one of thy friends, then?"\par
no, one other member-"Perhaps thy friend, then?"\par
sell,flou : Shop closed : "Come to my shop when it's open!"\par
Shop open : No flour : "Sorry, none of you has any flour."\par
Have flour : "Which of you?"\par
<NPC Name> turns to <Character Name>, and says "Will you take 5 gold for that sack of flour?"\par
yes-"Done!" He hands <Character Name> 5 gold pieces and takes the sack of flour.\par
Character has no flour-"Sorry, you haven't any flour."\par
no-"Changed your mind, eh?" he folds his arms.\par
"Well, what else will it be then?"\par
bye : "Come again soon!"\par
other : "Hmmm... <Last Input>..."\par
-or- : "<Last Input>..."\par
"Nope, I don't know anything about that!"\par
Tiberius\par
Introduction : a rotund man in monk's robes.\f0\'f2\par
"Greetings, my child. What can I do for thee today?"\par
heal : Shop closed : "Come to my shop when I'm open!"\par
Avatar solo, healthy : "Fret not, for thou art well."\par
Avatar in party, healthy : "Fret not, for all of you are well!"\par
Injured : "Which of you?"\par
"I see thy injury, <Character Name>."\par
"Wilt thou make an offering of 30 gold?"\par
yes, have gold-Laying hands upon <Character Name>, Tiberius mends the wounds.\par
no-"If thou wilt not pay, I cannot heal thee."\par
yes, no gold, low karma-"I'm sorry. Without an offering I cannot heal thee."\par
yes, no gold, high karma-"Thou art poor, but thy cause is just."\par
"I will heal thee without payment."\par
Laying hands upon <Character Name>, Tiberius mends the wounds.\par
"Is there aught else I can do for thee?"\par
cure : Shop closed : "Come to my shop when I'm open!"\par
Avatar solo, healthy : "Fret not, for thou art well."\par
Avatar in party, healthy : "Fret not, for all of you are well!"\par
Injured : "Which of you?"\par
"I sense that thou art poisoned, <Character Name>."\par
"Wilt thou make an offering of 10 gold?"\par
yes, have gold-Laying hands upon <Character Name>, Tiberius removes the poison.\par
no-"If thou wilt not pay, I cannot heal thee."\par
yes, no gold, low karma-"I'm sorry. Without an offering I cannot heal thee."\'b0\par
yes, no gold, high karma-"Thou art poor, but thy cause is just."\par
"I will cure thee without payment."\par
Laying hands upon <Character Name>, Tiberius removes the poison.\par
resu : Shop closed : "Come to my shop when I'm open!"\par
No characters dead : "But thou weepest for no reason! None of thy party is dead!"\par
Character dead : "I see that <Character Name> carries a parted friend."\par
"Wilt thou make an offering of 400 gold?"\par
no-"Then there is naught I can do save grieve with thee."\par
yes, no gold-"That ain't enough money."\par
"Thou art # gold piece\\s short."\par
"Go see a gravedigger. I'll reckon his price'll be lower."\par
yes, have gold-Your party takes up a collection for their fallen comrade.\par
Tiberius lays hands upon the corpse...\par
"Doman..."\par
"thixus..."\par
"anretu!"\par
And the dead live again!\par
If have another corpse : "I see that <Character Name> carries another slain friend."\par
name : I am Tiberius, healer for this town."\par
job : "It is my responsibility to care for the sick and injured."\par
"I attempt to heal, cure, or if needed, resurrect the fallen."\par
bye,no : "Go in peace, my child."\par
yes : "What can I do for thee?"\par
otherI beg thy pardon?"\par
Wilbur\par
Introduction : a thin, dark-haired man with a nervous smile.\par
Subsequent visits : "Hello again, my friend/s! What can I do for you!"\par
Initial visit : "Greetings, traveler/s! What can I do for thee this <Time of Day>?"\par
name : "My name's Wilbur, <Gender>."\par
job : "I work here at the stables, taking care of the horses."\par
"You can buy one if you'd like."\par
ed,smit,talk : "A talking horse? Ridiculous! Who told you that?"\par
He seems more nervous than before.\par
hors : "Aye, if you wish to buy one, just say the word."\par
buy : Solo, already have a horse : "But thou already hast a horse!"\par
In party, all have horses : "But all of you are already on horses!"\par
Character is horseless : "Which of you?"\par
"Aye, <Character Name>, thou hast need of a horse."\par
No gold-"But thou canst not afford one!"\par
Have gold-"My price is # gold pieces, no less. Interested?"\par
yes-"Good!" <NPC Name> takes <Character Name>'s gold, and hands over the reins of a fine horse.\par
no-"Perhaps some other time then."\par
"How about one of thy friends/thy friend?"\par
bye : "Come back again!"\par
other : "Beg pardon, <Gender>?"\par
Arty\par
Introduction : a silent but good-natured man.\par
He looks up from his tankard of ale, sees you and smiles.\par
At pub : He grins widely and waves at you.\par
name : He points to his mouth and shakes his head.\par
<Character Name> speaks. "I know of this person, <Gender>."\par
"He is Arty the Mute, a local shipwright and an honored citizen."\par
The man smiles and nods.\par
mute : Arty smiles and nods.\par
deaf : The man shakes his head.\par
buy,ship,skif : At pub : The man looks at you, puzzled.\'b0\par
Not at pub : Nothing for sale, or don't have skiff/ship as requested : The man shakes his head and spreads his hands as if to say "sorry."\par
only ships left : The man smiles and points to the deed to a ship.\par
Only skiffs left : The man smiles and points to the deed to a skiff.\par
Ships and skiffs left : The man smiles and points to the deed to a ship and the deed to a skiff.\par
Item available : Who is buying?\par
<NPC Name> shows <Character Name> a deed. Written on it is the price, # gold.\par
Does <Character Name> want to buy the deed?\par
yes, full-<Character Name> cannot carry that.\par
yes, have gold-After accepting the gold, <NPC Name> smiles and hands <Character Name> the deed.\par
yes, have gold in party-Your party takes up a collection to purchase the vessel.\par
<NPC Name> seems pleased.\par
yes, no gold, player solo-<NPC Name> shrugs. You don't have enough gold for that.\par
yes, no gold, player in party-Your party doesn't have enough gold for that.\par
no-Arty shrugs.\par
job : At pub : The man looks at you, puzzled.\par
Then he raises his tankard and goes back to drinking.\par
Not at pub : He smiles and points to the workbench.\par
On the bench, you see the tools of a shipwright.\par
bye : Arty waves as you leave, then returns to\par
at pub : his ale.\par
not at pub : what he was doing.\par
other : At pub : The man just shrugs and takes another swig from his mug.\par
Not at pub : The man seems frustrated, as if there were something he wanted to say.\par
-or- : The man just shrugs.\par
Lynn\par
Introduction : a tall, willowy woman with long blond hair.\par
Subsequent visits : "Well, hello again, Avatar!"\par
Initial visit : "How can I help thee this fine <Time of Day>?"\par
name : "I'm Lynn."\par
"Thou needn't tell me thy name, <Avatar Name>. The Avatar is famous throughout the land!"\par
job : "I am a fletcher."\par
"I make arrows and bolts for the armies of Lord British himself!"\par
buy,arro,bolt : Shop closed : "Come to my shop when I'm open!"\par
Shop open : "Which of you?"\par
1) Arrows\par
2) Crossbow Bolts\par
"Which item?"\par
No character/item selected : "Beg pardon, <Gender>?"\par
Item selected : "I sell <Item Name>s only by the dozen."\par
"How many dozens?"\par
Partially full : "Thou canst not carry that many!"\par
"I will sell thee just # dozen <Item Name>s."\par
Completely full : "But thou canst not carry any <Item Name>s!"\par
Partial gold : "Thou hast not enough gold for that many!"\par
"I will sell thee just # dozen <Item Name>s."\par
No gold : "But thou canst not afford any <Item Name>s!"\par
Enough gold/space : Lynn takes <Character Name>'s money and hands over the <Item Name>s.\par
"I appreciate thy business."\par
"Is there aught else thou wouldst buy?"\par
no, no purchase-"Perhaps some other time."\par
no, made purchase-"Enjoy thy <Item Name>s."\par
sell : "I have all I need, and have no reason to purchase anything more."\par
"But I appreciate thy offer."\par
bye : "Farewell! I hope I've aided thy quest!"\par
other : "Beg pardon?"\par
Terri\par
Introduction : a sharply dressed, very voluptuous woman.\par
At pub : "I'm eating right now. Come see me at the mint sometime and we can chat."\par
Initial visit : "Hello. My name's Terri - I run the mint."\par
"Say, aren't you the Avatar? Yes, I recognize you from your portrait..."\par
"My mother used to tell me stories about you when I was a girl."\par
"You probably wouldn't remember her, but she was at the big celebration right after you recovered the Codex."\par
"Anyway... I just wanted to tell you that I always\par
female : wanted to grow up to be just like you..."\par
male : hoped someday I'd meet a man like you..."\par
Subsequent visits : "Oh, you've come back to visit me again!"\par
name : If female : "It's Terri... But I wish I had been named after you."\par
If male : "Don't you think that would be a good name for an Avatar's wife?"\par
job : "By royal decree, I am the only one allowed to mint the official coinage of the realm."\par
"Copper pence, silver pieces, and gold crowns - they're all made right here."\par
"My father ran the mint before me. But I get lonely here sometimes..."\par
"It's so nice of you to come by and talk to me."\par
"Kytyn will never believe it when I tell her I got to meet the Avatar in person!"\par
avat : "You must be the bravest woman/man I've ever met. I can't believe it's really you!"\par
fath : "May he rest in peace."\par
moth : "May she rest in peace."\par
copp,penc,silv,piec : "Of course, I'm sure you only carry gold crowns with you, being as important as you are."\par
She reaches over and squeezes your shoulder affectionately.\par
mint,offi,coin,made : "Here, let me show you." She takes out a sample of each coin for you to look at.\par
The pence has an ankh on one side, and crossed swords on the other.\par
The silver piece has Lord British's face on the front, and a serpent on the back.\par
And the gold crown is a familiar sight, with a crown and the symbol of the Codex.\par
All three of them look newly minted - they're very shiny.\par
exch,trad : "Do you have any gold nuggets you'd like to trade in for crowns?"\par
no-"Well, if you do later, you know where to find me."\par
yes, no nuggets-"You must be mistaken. But let me know if you come across any gold nuggets later."\par
yes-"Normally there's a ten percent tax on the exchange."\par
"But since you're the Avatar, I'll give you a full hundred crowns for every stone's-weight of gold you have."\par
She exchanges all of your gold nuggets for newly minted crowns.\par
gold,nugg,crow : "Britannia has been so prosperous lately that there's been a lot of demand for gold coinage."\par
"Of course we have you to thank for bringing us the Codex and saving Lord British."\par
"I get most of my gold from people who bring in nuggets to exchange them for coins."\par
"Do you have any gold nuggets you'd like to trade in for crowns?"\par
code,lord : "My mother told me all about it."\par
kyty : "She's a good friend of mine. She runs the museum."\par
muse : "You should visit there sometime. But please stay and talk to me a bit longer first...\par
bye : "I know you're very busy, saving Britannia and all that, but I hope you'll come and visit me again...\par
female : "It really was delightful talking to you."\par
male : "And maybe if you have time for it, I could show you more than a few silly coins!"\par
As you turn to leave, she pinches you.\par
other : You notice she was staring at you with a dreamy look in her eyes.\par
"Oh, I'm sorry, I wasn't listening. I was just\par
If female : thinking how nice it must be to be as beautiful as you."\par
If male : noticing how strong and handsome you are..."\par
She looks away and sighs.\par
Kytyn\par
Introduction : a slender woman wearing a leather glove on her left hand.\par
"Hello and welcome, <Gender>!"\par
name : "My name is Kytyn." She smiles. "Perhaps that explains why I like birds."\par
glov,bird : "I used to be a falconer."\par
falc : "That was before Lord British appointed me to my current position."\par
lord,brit : "A true gentleman if ever I saw one."\par
job,appo,posi : "I'm the curator of the royal museum of oddities."\par
roya,muse : "It's just one of the projects Lord British has funded to provide a better life for his people."\par
proj,fund,bett,life : "He also established the conservatory that shares the building with the museum."\par
"The roads that span the realm are his doing as well."\par
cons,shar,buil : "Sometimes I can hear their music drifting through the walls..."\par
"Usually that noisy, crackling field drowns it out, though."\par
musi,drif,hear : "It's very pretty."\par
road,real,netw : "Travel is much easier these days."\par
trav : "That's for sure."\par
cura,odd : "I can tell you more about any of the exhibits you're interested in."\par
exhi,inte : "We have the monolith, the energy field, the perpetual motion machine, the bones of Zog, the mystery fountain, and the dragon's head, wings, and egg."\par
"Which one were you curious about?"\par
bone,zog : "This skeleton seems to be about ten times older than any other ever found in Britannia."\par
"Surely it has much to tell us about our origins, if we only knew what it meant!"\par
drag,head,wing,egg : "Someone named 'Gertan' donated all those parts."\par
"I think he said something about a dragon named 'Freitag'."\par
gert,frei : "If you want to ask Gertan, I think he's in Cove."\par
myst,foun : "Somebody found a huge boulder with a jet of water spraying out of it."\par
"We had it magically teleported here, buried with its surface flush with the ground, and then we built this building on top of it."\par
"Of course we left a hole in the floor for the water to spray through."\par
"I often drink from it when I'm thirsty. The water is quite good, but there's something strange about it."\par
"It vanishes somehow before it hits the ground..."\par
perp,moti,mach,gear : "That's a very curious device. The motion of each gear turns another, until eventually the movement is propagated back to the same gear again."\par
"There's one thing I can't figure out."\par
"We've made plans of the device, and I can't see how they started it moving in the first place."\par
"None of the gears would turn unless all the others were already going."\par
"What's worse, the motions serve to hold the machine together."\par
"If the gears were still, the whole thing would fall apart! How it was built is quite a mystery."\par
ener,fiel,nois,crac : "The field is generated by a curious spell."\par
"By some process not yet understood, it converts magical energy into electrical energy, producing a continuous discharge."\par
"If we understood this process better, it would probably lead to all sorts of useful applications."\par
mono : "I can't tell you much about that. Lord British donated it to the museum, but I can't get him to talk about it."\par
"From what little he's said, I think it's an artifact from his home world."\par
libr,lyca : "There is a great deal of knowledge available there for the serious scholar."\par
bye : "Be sure to have a look at our paintings while you're here. And come again soon..."\par
"We're expecting some unicorn horns, and a Klein bottle from Trinsic."\par
purr : She favors you with a deep, throaty purr that sounds just like a cat.\par
other : "I can't help you with that. Try the library at the Lycaeum."\par
\'f8yn\'ef*\'f6She winks at you.\par
Finn\par
Introduction : a sly looking fellow, dressed in rags.\par
"Hello my good man/woman!"\par
name,who,susp : "He glances around quickly, to see if anyone seems to be listening. "I'm Lord British. But don't tell anyone."\par
"I'm in disguise so I can mingle with the commoners."\par
job : "I'm pretending to be a beggar. That way nobody will suspect who I really am. Here, give me a few coins to keep anyone from getting suspicious."\par
ming,comm : "Of course, nobody would dare say anything bad about me to my face. Nobody except Chuckles, anyway."\par
"But as a beggar, people will tell me just about anything!"\par
chuc : "He's in disguise too, you know. He's really Blackthorn."\par
blac : "I decided banishment was too harsh for him, so I brought him back and made him my jester."\par
"The real Chuckles is tied up in my dungeons. I got tired of him making fun of my nose."\par
bani,hars,jest,tied,dung : "I'm Lord British, and I can do whatever I want to!"\par
disg : "Very convincing, don't you think? I made it myself."\par
loan,roya,trea : "I've got forty million crowns. Not to mention my secret bank accounts."\par
ment,secr,bank,acco : "I told you not to mention that!"\par
lord,brit,beg : "I'm really Lord British. I can prove it to you. I know all of the eight mantras, and where the runes are, too!"\par
eigh : "I killed a dragon when I was eight, you know. With my bare hands, too!"\par
kill,drag,bare,hand : "He was a big one - but he hadn't reckoned with the likes of me. I was a tough kid."\par
reck,toug,kid : "I was so tough he couldn't chew me, and he had to spit me out. That's when I killed him."\par
mant : "Ok, here are the mantras:\par
justice - do\par
compassion - re\par
honor - mi\par
valour - fa\par
spirituality - so\par
humility - la\par
sacrifice - ti\par
Gosh, wouldn't you know it? The Mantra of Honesty slips my mind at the moment..."\par
rune : "I'll tell you this, because you look like someone who can keep a secret."\par
"I sent out eight fake runes to all the lords, to fool everybody."\par
"I put all the real ones in a little box, and hid it under my throne."\par
"You can't see it there, because I turned it invisible!"\par
thro,box,invi,fool : "A clever trick, or my I'm not Finn!"\par
finn : "Oh, that's just the name I'm pretending to go by. Of course you know I'm really Lord British."\par
"I can see you're too smart to be fooled by this disguise."\par
bye : "If you need me later, I'll be at the Blue Boar, disguised as the tavernkeeper."\par
"But I won't admit to it there if you ask me... Too many people that might hear."\par
If Shamino in party : You see Shamino smiling - an unusual sight.\par
Noticing your attention, he says "Perhaps there's a little of Lord British in us all."\par
other : "Oh, I know all about that. But I think you'd be better off if you learned about it on your own."\par
Do you give him any money?\par
no-"Broke, are you? Well, come by after I'm done with this disguise,and I'll give you a loan from the royal treasury."\par
yes-How much do you give?\par
Too much : You don't have that much.\par
Have enough : He takes the money. "Good. I'll get this back to you later."\par
Linda\par
introduction : a rugged looking lady farmer.\par
Initial visit : "Welcome, friend."\par
name : "My name is Linda."\par
job : "I raise crops. If you'd like to buy some grain, just say the word."\par
rais,crop : "Bread, cakes, pies, pastries... They all have their roots here."\par
brea,cake,pie,past : "Woman does not live on meat alone."\par
meat : "Cows and sheep are much more trouble to raise than wheat."\par
cow,shee : "They have their place. But not on my farm."\par
root,rais,whea,farm : "I was born to work the earth. It was either this, or be a gravedigger..."\par
grav : "That's not my kind of work."\par
woma : "Yes, men need to eat too, I suppose."\par
word : "The word 'grain,' silly!"\par
buy,grai : "Which of you?\par
"It'll cost you 2 gold for a sack of grain. Interested?"\par
yes-"Here you go."\par
yes, but full-"You look pretty full to me."\par
yes, but no gold-"Best check your coinpouch again."\par
no-"Okay."\par
bye : "May the sun shine on you, and the rain bring you nourishment."\par
other : "I don't know. I guess so."\par
Buccaneer's Den\par
\par
Captain Fox\par
Introduction : a handsome gentleman, immaculately dressed.\par
If brawling : "Can't talk now, <Gender>." He pauses to punch another pirate in the belly.\par
"Come back later when I've less on my mind!"\par
Not brawling : "Hello, <Gender>. Your company is welcome."\par
name : "I'm Captain Fox, of the Silken Stag."\par
capt : "When you say 'Captain,' all the pirates at the table turn to you expectantly.\par
When they realize you weren't talking to them, they go back to what they were doing.\par
silk,stag : "We just stopped off here for some supplies and a drink or two."\par
drin,two : "Well, maybe three wouldn't hurt."\par
job : "I sail the wide, wide sea, to the edges of the world and back again."\par
"Of course, I'm also known for the paintings I create in my spare time."\par
pain : "There are a few of them around here. Go see for yourself."\par
john : "Captain John, that lunatic?"\par
"I hear he went underground seeking the gargoyles, but he fled from the first one he encountered."\par
"Nobody knows where he is now."\par
If Leodon present : "Well, that's not what I heard." says Leodon.\par
unde : "Under the earth is no place for a seafaring man to be."\par
garg : "Tough creatures. My crew and I steer well clear of them."\par
edge,world : "Don't go too far, matey--ye'll fall off!" He laughs a hearty laugh and takes a swig of ale.\par
bye : "Until we meet again."\par
other : "I can't help ye with that."\par
-or- : Your question makes him laugh suddenly. His ale spills across the table.\par
He continues laughing as he pours himself another ale.\par
Captain Elad\par
Introduction : an uncomfortable looking man sitting behind a cup of tea.\par
If brawling : "Can't talk now. I'm--ungh!" He reels from a punch to his belly.\par
"I'm in the middle of something, <Gender>. Ouch!"\par
Not brawling : "Hello." His gaze darts from side to side, lingering longingly on the mugs of ale his fellow patrons are gulping down heartily.\par
name : Subsequent times : "Well, I'm still Captain Elad."\par
Initial time : He looks at you uneasily. "I'm Captain Elad. Not that it's any business of yours..."\par
job : "I was Captain of the Theodosia Marie--until she sank."\par
capt : "When you say 'Captain,' all the pirates at the table turn to you expectantly.\par
When they realize you weren't talking to them, they return to their business.\par
john : "Captain John, that fool... He was captured by gargoyles."\par
"I hear they dragged him down into Hythloth, and nobody's seen hide nor hair of him since."\par
If Leonna nearby : Leonna raises an eyebrow. "Is that so? I could tell a different tale..."\par
theo,mari,sank : "Aye, 'twas a terrible ordeal. We were sailing just off Bordermarch when the whole island started shaking."\par
"Must have been one of those earthquakes we've been having."\par
terr,orde,sail,isla,shak,size,gone,ship : "The whole island sank beneath the waves. We were caught in the huge whirlpool left in its wake."\par
"I was one of the lucky few to swim clear. But my ship's on the bottom of the ocean now, and that's the honest truth."\par
whir : He shudders, then takes a sip of his tea. "I don't like to think about it."\par
bord : "A fair sized island, and now she's gone! Some o' them earthquakes have been mighty fierce."\par
eart,quak : "Yes, they started soon after Lord British was rescued from the underworld."\par
"I lost my ship to the last one."\par
lord,brit : "I'd toast him with you, but this," he gestures disparagingly at his cup, "is hardly fitting for such an honor."\par
resc,unde : "Surely you've heard tales of the Avatar's bold exploits?"\par
"It was all anyone was talking about round here for weeks."\par
rune : "I wish I had one of them... I bet I could sell it for a pretty penny!"\par
mant : "You don't hear much about the virtues in a pirate town..."\par
hone,trut,virt,tea : "I could use more virtue in me life. I've just given up drinking, to start with."\par
drin : "Aye, 'tis quite a temptation."\par
temp : "Indeed." He takes another big gulp of tea.\'b0\par
bye : Subsequent times : The pirate smiles and waves goodbye, then scowls as he turns back to his mug of tea.\par
Initial time : "Wait, before you go..."\par
"I was wondering--do you know the @Mantra of Honesty?"\par
no-"Oh. Well, let me know if you find out later."\par
yes-"I've been trying to find out what it is, so that I can better myself."\par
"I'll give you five gold if you tell me. Is it a deal?"\par
no-"I'll be here with the money if you change your mind."\par
yes-Okay, what is it?"\par
nothing-The pirate frowns.\par
ahm-"Thank you! Now my meditations will succeed at last!"\par
As you turn to leave, you think you might have caught a glimpse of Captain Elad stealing a swig from someone else's mug... But you can't be sure.\par
other : "Ah, that's not important."\par
Leodon\par
Introduction : a woman with a slightly seaworn look, but delicate hands.\par
If in party : "Yes, <Avatar Name>?"\par
If brawling : "Not now, <Gender>!" She ducks a punch. "I'm busy!"\par
Initial visit : "A good <Time of Day> to you, <Gender>. Come, have a seat and talk with us a while."\par
name : "I'm Captain Leodon."\par
job : "I'm captain of the Golden Hind."\par
"She's the finest ship I've ever had the pleasure of sailing 'cross the briny deep."\par
fine,ship,sail,brin,deep,gold,hind,plea : "Life on the sea is the only life for me."\par
"Alas, the Hind needs serious repairs just now."\par
need,seri,repa : "Yes, I must keep myself occupied on land, meantime."\par
"Perhaps I could join thy party for a time."\par
occu,land,join,part : If in party : "I'd be glad to join you--but I have already!"\par
If not in party : "The Golden Hind won't be repaired for months, at the soonest."\par
"Traveling with you would likely prove interesting."\par
"Would you like me to come along?"\par
no-"Okay. I'll be here if you change your mind."\par
yes, in boat-"Not while you're in that thing!"\par
yes, party full-"You have enough travelling with you already."\par
"But if you ask one of them to leave first, I'd be happy to join you."\par
yes, joins party-"Very well. This should make a nice change from my usual routine."\par
"You might ask Leonna if she would like to join us as well."\par
leav : If in party : "I'd have to join you before I could leave, silly!"\par
If in boat : "Let's get our feet back on solid ground first, okay?"\par
If leaves : "Okay. I think I'll head back to the Fallen Virgin, then."\par
"Here's all the equipment I was carrying, if you need it."\par
life,sea : "Ah, the sea. 'Tis as vast as a thousand dreams."\par
vast,thou,drea : "Indeed."\par
capt : If not at bar : "You wouldn't be talking about Captain John, would you?"\par
If at bar : "When you say 'Captain,' all the pirates at the table turn to you expectantly.\par
When they realize you weren't talking to them, they return to their business.\'b0<br\par
leon : "Aye, Leonna is the best first mate I've ever had."\par
Leonna present : Leonna blushes and looks away, embarassed.\par
"Comes from being a captain once herself, you know."\par
john : "That scallawag?"\par
"He went down to the other side of the world to join up with the gargoyles, the dirty traitor..."\par
If Captain Elad present : The tea-drinker interrupts. "No, no, you've got it all wrong!"\par
"I can tell you the truth about Captain John!"\par
garg : "Vile creatures, they are."\par
"One of them attacked my ship once. He flew off with a ham before anyone could stop him."\par
vile,crea,ham : "Yes, he stole my ham, and I dined on biscuits that night."\par
dine,bisc : "That's right."\par
bye : If in party : "Back to our quest, eh <Gender>?"\par
If not in party : "Drop by again next time you're in town."\par
other : "I can't help you with that."\par
Leonna\par
Introduction : a smartly dressed woman. Her smile has a delightful subtlety to it.\par
If in party : "Yes, <Avatar Name>?"\par
If brawling : You fail to get her attention in the midst of the brawl.\par
Subsequent visits : Her face lights up as she recognizes you. "Hello again, <Avatar Name>!"\par
Initial visit : "Oh, you must be <Avatar Name>, the famous Avatar! 'Tis an honor to meet thee."\par
name : "My name is Leonna."\par
job : "I used to captain my own ship."\par
"But I fell on hard times, and now I sail with Leodon on the Hind."\par
hind,ship,sail : "A fine old vessel, the Golden Hind."\par
"Alas, I have little to do while she's being repaired."\par
litt,repa,join : If in party : "I'd be glad to join you--but I have already!"\par
Not in party : "Could I join your party, perhaps?"\par
no-"Okay. I guess I'll just stay here for now."\par
yes, in boat-"Not while you're in that thing!"\par
yes, party full-"You have enough traveling with you already."\par
"But if you ask one of them to leave first, I'd be happy to join you."\par
yes-"Oh good! I bet we'll meet a lot of interesting men..."\par
leav : Not in party : "I'd have to join you before I could leave, silly!"\par
In boat : "Let's get our feet back on solid ground first, okay?"\par
Leaves party : "Okay. I'll go wait back at the Fallen Virgin."\par
"You're more likely to need this equipment than I am."\par
She sets down everything she was carrying before walking off.\par
leod : "There's none I'd rather ship out with."\par
capt : If not at bar : "Captain who? I know lots of Captains..."\par
If at bar : When you say 'Captain,' all the pirates at the table turn to you expectantly.\par
When they realize you weren't talking to them, they return to their business.\par
john : "Captain John is a madman!"\par
"He went down in Hythloth seeking a way to the other side of the world."\par
"Said he was going to kill as many gargoyles as he could before they got him."\par
If Captain Fox present : "That's not true!" says Captain Fox. "I can tell you what really happened."\par
garg : "Please, let's not talk about them."\par
bye : "Talk to you later."\par
other : I can't help you with that."\par
Budo (U6)\par
Introduction : a chubby, jovial merchant.\par
"Good <Time of Day>! I bet you've come back to pick up that orrery you ordered."\par
If Dupre in party : "Don't be ridiculous! This is the first time we've ever been in your shop!" says Dupre.\par
"Oh, I'm sorry. I must have thought you were somebody you aren't.\par
If Dupre not in party : "I'm afraid it still hasn't arrived."\par
Subsequent visits : "Do you need to buy some supplies?"\par
no-"Then it must be Thursday--or possibly Tuesday."\par
"I never seem to sell anything on Tuesdays."\'b0Y"What can I do you for?"\par
yes-"Which, torches, oil, lockpicks, gems, backpacks, bags, shovels, or powder kegs?"\par
name : "Why, it's Budo, I believe. That's what it was last week."\par
"Some call me 'the Den', but I don't think that's my name."\par
den : "I think someone told me that was Nick's name."\par
nick : "I've never met him, myself."\par
orre : "I don't know what it is, but I've got one on order."\par
job : "Oh, I sell this and that."\par
"I'm not sure what 'this' and 'that' are, but I sell a lot of them!"\par
"People give me money for them, that is."\par
mone : "It's not as sweet as honey, but you can trade one for the other."\par
swee,hone : "I like honey."\par
thie,guil,belt : If joined guild : "To keep the guild safe, each member only knows the names of two others."\par
"You're safer not knowing more about the guild than you have to, believe me..."\par
If have belt He glances about quickly, to make sure nobody else is listening.\par
In a low voice he says, "Congratulations, and welcome to the guild."\par
"I can offer you the standard member's discount on all supplies now."\par
"Just remember, whatever you do, don't tell anyone about our guild!"\par
If not joined guild or have belt : A startling change comes over his features.\par
Suddenly the good-natured bumbler that stood before you has been transformed into a shrewd, sharp, dangerous looking man.\par
He leans forward staring straight into your eyes as he asks "Who sent you?"\par
"Uh-huh. Well... Were you hoping to join?"\par
no-"Then just remember this. I don't take kindly to anyone spreading secrets around."\par
"If you were to tell anyone I'm involved with the guild, well..."\par
"Let's just say accidents can happen to anyone--even the Avatar."\par
"Now get out of my shop."\par
yes-"All right, maybe you've got what it takes. We'll see."\par
"To be a member of the thieves' guild, you have to get your own belt."\par
"Now we have a limited membership, so there's only so many belts in the world."\par
"If you want one of them, you have to 'retire' a member of the guild."\par
"Lucky for you, it just happens there's a member we'd like to see 'retired' soon."\par
"Her hideout is deep below Britain, in the sewers. You'd best watch out for the rats down there!"\par
"One last thing... It would be an embarassment for the guild to have bodies turning up inconveniently."\par
"So don't get too violent unless you have to."\par
"I'll talk to you when you get back."\par
buy,sell,this,that : "Which, torches, oil, lockpicks, gems, backpacks, bags, shovels, or powder kegs?"\par
torc,oil,lock,gem,back,bags,shov,powd,keg : "Which of you?"\par
<NPC Name> looks at <Character Name>, "It'll cost you # gold for each <Item Name>, how many do you want?"\par
Large number-"Come now, that's a little much don't you think?"\par
no-<NPC Name> frowns at <Character Name>, "That was a good price."\par
Inventory full-<NPC Name> looks at <Character Name>. "You haven't any room in your pack."\par
Not enough gold-"I think you have less gold than you thought."\par
Bought item-He hands <Character Name> # <Item name>\par
"There you go."\par
If can't afford full amount : "That's all you can carry."\par
If can't carry full amount : "That's all you can afford."\par
bye Asked about guild : He winks at you. "The guild is behind you, as long as you keep our secret."\par
Didn't ask about guild : "Ta ta for now."\par
other : Asked about guild : "<Last Input>? It seems to me I knew something about that, but I'm having trouble with my remembering."\par
Didn't ask about guild : He leans even closer, transfixing you with his gaze.\par
Homer\par
Introduction : a shifty-eyed character. He carries a cane and walks with a slight limp.\par
If gave cloak : "You served your purpose by bringing me the cloak... Now I have no further need of you."\par
"I have big plans now, and no time to waste talking."\par
Initial visit : He takes your measure, looking you over from head to toe. "What do you want?"\par
name : "Who wants to know?"\par
"Fine, '<Last Input>' - if that's what your name really is... You can call me Homer."\par
home : "Well, get on with it!"\par
job : "I once sailed on the ship called 'Empire,' under Captain Hawkins."\par
empi,sail : "It was wrecked on the cape, southwest of here. Not too far from Serpent's Hold."\par
hawk : "His eyes light up with hatred. "That heartless bastard..."\par
"He was killed by his own men, and it was no worse than he deserved."\par
He hesitates, then adds quickly, "Of course, I had nothing to do with it."\par
silv,tabl : He regards you warily. "Who sent you?"\par
"I see." He screws his face up into an even more suspicious expression than before.\par
"Just why do you want to know about it, anyway?"\par
If not member of guild : "You're not a member of the guild. I don't have to tell you anything."\par
If member of guild : "You're looking for the silver tablet? It's part of Captain Hawkin's buried treasure."\par
buri,trea : Member of guild : "It was buried in a small cave."\par
Not member of guild : "Don't know anything about it."\par
cave : Member of guild : "After Captain Hawkins passed away, we tore his treasure map into nine pieces."\par
"The plan was, when nobody was looking for us any more, we'd get together and go dig it up."\par
"Splitting up the map was my idea - that way nobody could doublecross the others."\par
"I figure after all these years the others must have given up, so its alright for me to search for the treasure by myself."\par
"Trouble is, I've got a bit of the gout in one leg, and I can't travel much any more."\par
"Maybe we can help each other out."\par
"I know where my piece of the map is hidden, and if you bring me the other eight pieces, perhaps we could make a deal."\par
"I'll tell you all I know about where the pieces might be..."\par
"Ol' Hawknose set out for the Dry Land, to kill the daemon that is said to live there."\par
"Sandy, the ship's cook, went to Trinsic with the first mate."\par
"Old Ybarra said he was headed for the dungeon Shame, looking for more treasure."\par
"I think one of the men died in a shipwreck."\par
"Then there was one more... Can't remember his name, but I've heard tell he settled in Jhelom."\par
"He'll be easy to recognize - he has a hook in place o' one of his hands."\par
"That's all I know. Perhaps in your travels you can find out where the others have gone."\par
"When you find the pieces, you can lay them out on the ground to see how they fit together."\par
"But remember, only I know where the ninth piece is, so come back here when you've got the other eight."\par
Not member of guild : "What are you talking about?"\par
guil : Not member of guild : Go ask Budo. And you didn't hear that from me, understand?"\par
bye : Member of guild : "Farewell, brother thief."\par
Not member of guild : "Can't say its been a pleasure."\par
Other : Member of guild : "Can't help you there."\par
Not member of guild : "You've got an awful lot of questions... Maybe I don't care to talk about <Last Input>."\par
If Avatar agreed to get storm cloak : "Have you found the storm cloak yet?"\par
no-"Then get off your duff and go dig it up!"\par
yes-"Then hand it over and we're even." His eyes gleam with greedy anticipation.\par
Do you give him the cloak?\par
no-\par
Blast ye! If I still had two good legs, I'd keelhaul the lot of you!"\par
"We had a deal! Besides, I helped steal that treasure myself, fair and square."\par
"Can't trust anybody these days..."\par
yes, no cloak-You have no storm cloak to give him.\par
yes-He takes the cloak from you. "Thanks for keeping your word. There's not many that does, these days..."\par
If Avatar collected 8 pieces of map : "So, have ye found the eight pieces of the map yet?"\par
no"Then what are you wasting my time for?"\par
yes, don't have-"Best count again. You need eight pieces before I'll bargain with you."\par
yes-"Very well. I've been thinking about how we could work out a deal."\par
"I know you want the silver tablet. Far as I'm concerned, you can have it."\par
"All I really want is the magical cloak that's buried with the rest of the treasure."\par
"So I'll tell you where the ninth piece of the map is if you promise to bring me the cloak."\par
"The rest of the treasure should be loot enough to satisfy you. Is it a deal?"\par
no-"Suit yourself, mate, that's the only deal I'll offer."\par
yes-"Okay. The ninth piece of the map is hidden..."\par
"Right here in my pocket!" He grins wickedly.\par
"I had to keep it safe while you were off gathering the others, didn't I?"\par
He hands you the last piece of the map.\par
"The island in the upper left hand corner is Buccaneer's Den."\par
"You'll keep your word and come right back here with the magic storm cloak, won't you?"\par
no-Don't want to keep your word now that you have the map, eh?"\par
"Well, then, I won't tell you where you need to dig to find the treasure!"\par
yes-"Good. Then I'll tell you this:"\par
"When you reach the island marked with the X, find the three stones and stand in the center."\par
"Then walk three paces due south, nine paces due west, and twelve more paces south."\par
"That should put you right next to an old dead tree."\par
"Dig in the patch of dirt just to the south of you, and you'll find the treasure!"\par
"Now go get it!"\par
Johann\par
Introduction : an uneasy looking bard.\par
"Oh, hello. Can I help you with something?"\par
name : "They call me 'Yodeling Johann.'"\par
job : "I sing songs for the pira - for the sailors here."\par
"But I'm looking for a chance to move to another town."\par
sail : "They're fine, hearty fellows, one and all."\par
yode : "I'd better not..." "I've still got bruises from the last time I tried yodeling around here."\par
move : "Not that there are pirates around here or anything..."\par
"The salty air just doesn't agree with me."\par
pira : "Did I say pirates? I didn't say that." He looks around nervously.\par
"Nobody but fine honest sailors around here."\par
He lowers his voice. "By the way..."\par
"If you should happen to run across Bonn, or Ybarra, or Hawkins, don't tell them I'm here."\par
bonn,ybar,hawk : "Who's he? Never 'eard of 'im."\par
empi : He spits on the ground and then says, "What?"\par
song : "Oh, a loon with a spoon\par
Sang a song of ballooning.\par
And the man in the moon\par
Said it was quite a tune."\par
\par
"Now one fine day in June\par
A young man went ballooning.\par
Did he rise up to glory\par
Or fall to his doom?"\par
\par
"Just one thing will I say\par
Of the sport of ballooning:\par
On the ground will I stay\par
While the ground still has room!"\par
ball : "Oh, that's just some nonsense that gave me an idea for a song..."\par
"I read about it in a book at the Lycaeum."\par
lyca,book : "Ask the librarian there for help."\par
bye : "Good day."\par
Shawn\par
Introduction : a charismatic man with an engaging smile.\par
Subsequent visits : "Welcome back, stranger." He winks at you.\par
Initial Visit : "Welcome." He makes a sweeping gesture with his hat.\par
name : "Shawn, friend."\par
buy : "Which: ham, ale, mead, wine, or rations?"\par
job : "I sell ham, ale, mead, wine, and rations."\par
ham : "It'll cost you 5 gold for the ham. Interested?"\par
no-"Very well..."\par
yes-"Which of you?"\par
yes, full-"You can't carry it, <Character Name>."\par
yes-"Excellent!" After accepting the gold, <NPC Name> serves <Character Name> the ham.\par
yes, no gold-"How were you looking to pay for the meal? Eh?"\par
mead, ale, wine : "Which of you?"\par
"Very well..."\par
<NPC Name> smiles at <Character Name> and says, "That will cost you # gold. Interested?"\par
no-"Very well..."\par
yes, full-"You can't carry it, <Character Name>."\par
yes-"Fine!" After accepting <Character Name>'s gold, <NPC Name> hands over the purchase.\par
yes, not enough gold-"You don't have enough gold, <Character Name>."\par
rati : "Which of you?"\par
"Very well..."\par
<NPC Name> looks at <Character Name> and says, "It'll cost you 4 gold for each ration. How many do you want?"\par
too many"Come now, that's a little much, don't you think?"\par
no-<NPC Name> frowns at <Character Name> and says, "That was a good price."\par
yes, full-"You haven't any room in your pack, <Character Name>."\par
yes, not enough gold-"Mutton rations cost more gold than you have, <Character Name>."\par
yes-He hands <Character Name> # mutton ration\\s.\par
shaw : "That's it."\par
bye : "I'm glad you stopped by." He gives you a firm handshake.\par
other : "I'm sorry. Perhaps you could ask someone else."\par
Petroph\par
Introduction : a giant of a man with a solemn stare.\par
If didn't stay at inn : "What you back for? I thought you not like my inn."\par
Subsequent visits : "Heylo again."\par
Initial visit : "Heylo to you."\par
name : "Petroph."\par
petr : "Da, Petroph."\par
job : "I am keeping the inn, here at King's Ransom."\par
room,inn : "# gold for you to stay and have meal, good?"\par
yes, no gold-"Must pay in advance for rooms. Sorry, is policy."\par
yes-You sleep in a comfortable bed...\par
You wake rested and eat a large breakfast.\par
"Good morning to you."\par
no : "What, maybe you don't like my inn?"\par
"Well, maybe I don't like you either!"\par
bye : If didn't buy room : "Da, goodbye and good riddance!"\par
If didn't ask about room : "Have a nice day."\par
other : "You speak too quick. What was that?"\par
Enrik\par
Introduction : a scarred man with a gap-toothed grin and large, calloused hands.\par
If fighting : "Don't like talking when I'm fighting!"\par
Initial visit : "Hello, hello."\par
Subsequent visits : "Right. You been here before." He studies you carefully.\par
"What'll it be?"\par
buy : Hey, what's it look like, I'm a mind reader?"\par
"Do ya want arms or armor?"\par
armo : If shop closed : "Come by my shop when I'm open!"\par
If shop open : "Which of you?"\par
"Which item?"\par
"That <Item Name> costs # gold."\par
"Interested, <Character Name>?"\par
no-"Changed your mind, eh?"\par
yes, but full-"But that'd make you o'erburdened, <Character Name>!"\par
yes-After accepting <Character Name>'s gold, <NPC Name> hands over the <Item Name>.\par
yes, not enough gold-"But you don't got enough gold, <Character Name>!"\par
arm,arms : If shop closed : "Come by my shop when I'm open!"\par
If shop open : "Which of you?"\par
"Which item?"\par
"That <Item Name> costs # gold."\par
"Interested, <Character Name>?"\par
no-"Changed your mind, eh?"\par
yes, but full-"But that'd make you o'erburdened, <Character Name>!"\par
yes-After accepting <Character Name>'s gold, <NPC Name> hands over the <Item Name>.\par
yes, not enough gold-"But you don't got enough gold, <Character Name>!"\par
sell : If shop closed : "Come by my shop when I'm open!"\par
If shop open : Nothing interesting : "Sorry, none of you's got anything I need."\par
Have something interesting : "Aye, <Character Name> has somethin' interestin'..."\par
"Which of you?"\par
"Which item?"\par
"Will you take # gold for that <Item Name>0, <Character Name>?"\par
no, no other items-"Mebbe some other time."\par
no, have other items-"Mebbe somethin' else?"\par
yes-"Done!"\par
<NPC Name> hands <Character Name> # gold pieces and takes the <Item Name>.\par
job : "And my mutter said I was thick."\par
"You can buy's arms from me or sell me yer used stuff."\par
name : "Enrik. Enrik the Hammer's what I'm known as 'round here."\par
enri : "I prefers Hammer."\par
hamm : "They call me that 'cause I's got a good left."\par
good,left : "Keep it up and I'll show ya," he growls.\par
bye : "Yeah, gotta get back ta work."\par
other : He gives you a blank stare.\par
Fentrissa\par
Introduction : a strong, sinewy woman with a hard look about her.\par
Initial visit : "Smell that salt air, friend. Brings a tear to me eye..."\par
Subsequent visits : "Welcome, welcome!" She slaps you heartily on the back.\par
name : "Fentrissa."\par
fent : "A strong name, as strong as the sea." She looks into the distance.\par
sea : "Beautiful thing, but a jealous man he is."\par
jeal,man : "Many call her a female."\par
"If ya ask me, men are much more unpredictable."\par
buy,deed : If bought all ships/skiffs : "You bought my last craft."\par
If not bought ship : "I sell ships and skiffs."\par
ship : If bought all ships : "Sorry, I sold you my last one."\par
If not bought all ships : "Which of you?"\par
<NPC Name> turns to <Character Name>, "It'll cost you # gold for the deed. Interested?"\par
yes, inventory full-<NPC Name> looks at <Character Name>. "You look pretty full to me."\par
yes, have gold-"Excellent!" After accepting the gold, <NPC Name> hands <Character Name> the deed.\par
"Sail her straight."\par
"You'll ne'er find a better craft."\par
yes, not enough gold : "Your party hasn't enough money."\par
"It looks like you're # gold piece\\s short."\par
"Sorry."\par
If party works together : Your party takes up a collection for the deed.\par
skif : If bought all skiffs : "Sorry, I sold you my last one."\par
If not bought all skiffs : "Which of you?"\par
<NPC Name> turns to <Character Name>, "It'll cost you # gold for the deed. Interested?"\par
yes, inventory full-<NPC Name> looks at <Character Name>. "You look pretty full to me."\par
yes, have gold-"Excellent!" After accepting the gold, <NPC Name> hands <Character Name> the deed.\par
"Sail her straight."\par
"You'll ne'er find a better craft."\par
yes, not enough gold : "Your party hasn't enough money."\par
"It looks like you're # gold piece\\s short."\par
"Sorry."\par
If party works together : Your party takes up a collection for the deed.\par
job : If bought all ships/skiffs : "I'm out of work after selling you all my ships and skiffs."\par
If bought all skiffs : "I have @ships for sale, but I sold you my last skiff."\par
If bought all ships : "I sold you my last ship, but I still have some skiffs left."\par
If not purchased vessels : "I sell ships and skiffs."\par
bye : "Have a good one." She bows, hands on her hips.\par
other : "Ask around."\par
Castle Britannia\par
\par
Dupre\par
Introduction : a ruggedly handsome man, wearing a gleaming suit of armor.\par
"Yes, <Avatar Name>?"\par
name : "It's Dupre - sounds like dew pray, remember?"\par
job : "Why, questing, of course! We've been on many a quest together, you and I."\par
ques : "Yes, you've gone on some really fine ones."\par
"When you're not around I have to settle for rescuing damsels, finding grails, and the like."\par
resc,dams : "It could be worse."\par
"Some of them are pretty eager to show their gratitude, if you know what I mean..."\par
eage,grat,know,mean : "Wink wink, nudge nudge, say no more..."\par
find,grai : "That's right."\par
"Lord British likes to keep grails around to use at his banquets, but he's always losing them."\par
lord,brit,banq : "He'll throw us a fine feast if you can deal with the gargoyle invasion somehow."\par
garg,inva : "They may be the toughest threat we've ever faced.\par
join : "I've been with you since the start of this quest, haven't I?"\par
leav : "Lord British gave me strict orders not to leave your side until this quest is complete."\par
"Besides, you know how I hate to miss a good quest."\par
duck : "Please, let's not talk about ducks..."\par
bye : "Yes, enough chit chat. Let's go find some action!"\par
other : "Ask Iolo about that."\par
Shamino\par
Introduction : a quiet man, who almost seems to be a creature of the forest.\par
"Yes, my friend?"\par
name : "Shamino Salle' Dacil."\par
job : "I help my friends when they need it."\par
"The rest of my time I prefer to spend exploring the woods."\par
frie : "Though we have spent much time apart between your several visits to our realm, still I consider you one of my closest friends."\par
wood,expl : "I prefer the Deep Forest."\par
"Spiritwood isn't as dense, and it has those strange wisps everywhere."\par
deep,fore : "It is home to me."\par
"I love walking in the dark shadows of the trees, and studying the nature of the forest creatures."\par
home : "A home needs not walls to make it so."\par
wall : "When folk ask why I have no walls in my home, I ask where are the trees in theirs!" He smiles.\par
tree : "In many ways they are the lifesblood of the realm. Without trees, we could not long endure."\par
crea : "Those that dwell in the woods have lives of their own, more interesting to me than the ways of townfolk."\par
"There is much to be learned from the animals, if you will but listen."\par
If Dupre in party : Dupre says "Now Shamino's going on about talking to animals... The whole world's going batty!"\par
wisp : "I know little of their nature. I believe there are some mages who have investigated them, however."\par
mage : "Perhaps one of the members of the council could tell you more."\par
garg : "I feel that Lord British does not understand their true nature."\par
lord,brit : "I know him better than you might think."\par
join : "I'll follow you wherever you might choose to lead - you know that."\par
leav : "I feel you need my guidance through the wild parts of Britannia. I'd best stay with you."\par
bye : "A pleasure."\par
other : "Ask Dupre about that."\par
Iolo\par
Introduction : your old friend Iolo.\par
"Well, <Avatar Name>, do you need help with something? Or maybe you've got time for a story, eh?"\par
name : "Iolo's the only name I remember having." (He pronounces his name 'Yo-low.')\par
help : "If you want me to gather all our gold together so you can carry it, just say so."\par
"Or I could split it up evenly, if you prefer."\par
gath,pool : Splits gold : Iolo gathers up everyone's gold and hands it to you.\par
No gold to amass : "None of us are carrying any gold, <Gender>."\par
Avatar given max : Iolo collects some gold together and hands it to you.\par
"Here, this is all you can carry right now."\par
Avatar full : "You're carrying enough already, I think."\par
spli,shar : No gold : "But we have no gold, <Gender>!"\par
Very little gold : "We don't have enough gold to bother with, <Gender>."\par
Splits gold to all members : Iolo gathers everyone's gold together and divides it evenly.\par
Splits gold to some members : Iolo splits up the gold between everyone who has room to carry any.\par
hut,home,smit,clue : "My hut is in the Deep Forest, south of Yew."\par
"My horse Smith lives there."\par
job : "I've been a crossbow maker for so long, I've gotten weary of it."\par
"Hopefully, now that my apprentice has taken over the shop, I'll be able to spend more time as a bard."\par
appr,shop,cros : "My shop still sells the finest crossbows in the land."\par
"I've done a lot over the years to refine the design, and I trained my apprentice well."\par
"I'm sure she'll carry on the tradition in fine fashion."\par
bard : "Yes, it's always been a hobby of mine."\par
"Have you heard the piece 'Stones' that I composed some years ago?"\par
no-"Oh, you should get my wife Gwenno to teach it to you some time."\par
yes-"It's one of my favorites."\par
wife,gwen : "She's had more time to develop her musical talents than I all these years."\par
"But after this quest I hope to join her in Minoc and enter the artisan's guild."\par
ques : "There always seems to be a quest when you come to visit us, doesn't there?"\par
"Some time you should just drop by for tea."\par
tea : "All right, make it Frasier's Folly, then."\par
fras,foll : "A drink worthy enough to greet an old friend."\par
mino : "Not as big as Britain, but it's a peaceful town."\par
arti,guil,musi : "Though there is still need for the instruments of war, as I grow in years I would now take up those of peace."\par
brit : "You know. Where Mr. Nose hangs out."\par
mr,nose,nibs : "Remember, he doesn't like people to call him that..."\par
join : "I've been with you since we saved you from those gargoyles, haven't I?"\par
garg : "They're pretty ugly looking, if you ask me..."\par
leav : "His nibs, the king, told me I should stay with you constantly."\par
"I'll make an exception when you have to relieve yourself, of course."\par
stor : "My favorite one is about the time I had to wake Dupre up for a tournament..."\par
Dupre in party : Dupre cuts in.\par
"Iolo! You promised NEVER to tell anyone about that!"\par
"Yes, you're right. I'm sorry." He whispers to you, "Ask me later when he's not around..."\par
Dupre not in party : "But maybe I shouldn't tell you about that. After all, I did promise..."\par
bye : "I've still got to tell you that story about Dupre sometime..."\par
spam : "Ask Shamino about that."\par
other : "Ask Shamino about that."\par
Lord British\par
Introduction : the noble ruler of Britannia.\par
Initial visit : "<Avatar Name>! 'Tis good to see thee again. Much hath happened since thou last departed our realm."\par
"But I must make sure 'tis truly thee."*\par
"Only the true Avatar would know what was contained in the Compendium I sent."*\par
Answered questions correctly : "Ah, 'tis thee indeed, <Avatar Name>. Take this key."\par
"It will unlock the gatehouse by the southern entrance to the castle."\par
"Then you can use the lever inside to raise the portcullis, and the crank will lower the drawbridge."\par
"The same key will also let you into the sewers under the castle."\par
"Now let me tell thee what hath transpired since thy last visit."\par
"The vast underworld from which thou didst rescue me hath collapsed."\par
"Yet still there are forces of evil abroad in the land."\par
"Britannia is under attack by gargoyles such as those thou just fought."\par
"They have been coming up through the dungeons."\par
"Thus far they have mainly been attacking the shrines of the eight virtues."\par
"When the Shrine of Compassion didst fall, Sir Geoffrey sent a party to free it."\par
"Do thou ask him of this mission. Perhaps thou canst prove of some assistance."\par
"Whilst thou art here, I have a room in the castle set aside for thy personal use."\par
"'Tis in the west wing of the castle, just south of mine own chambers."\par
"I have had my servants place some equipment there, in case thou shouldst have need of it."\par
"Of course, thou mayst feel free to borrow anything in my castle, if thou shouldst need it."\par
"Lastly, any time thou dost need healing, do thou but ask me."\par
"If thou doth wish me to repeat all this later, thou need but ask."\par
Lost key to castle : "I see thou hath misplaced thy key to the castle."\par
"Here is another."\par
Answered questions correctly : "Good <Time of Day>, <Avatar Name>. What wouldst thou speak of?"\par
name : "I am Lord British, as thou knowest well."\par
rep : Repeat Introduction :\par
job : "Thanks to thee, I sit once more upon the throne of Britannia."\par
"Though 'tis a heavy burden in such troubled times as these."\par
heav,burd,trou,time : "The gargoyles art indeed the greatest threat our realm has ever known."\par
"We are fortunate indeed that fate hath brought thee here in our hour of need."\par
garg : "Perhaps thou canst drive these vile creatures back into the bowels of the earth from whence they came."\par
"All our efforts thus far have availed us naught."\par
shri : "By now the gargoyles may have captured them all."\par
"Thou must hurry if thou wouldst foil their evil schemes..."\par
virt : "Stay strong in thy commitment to the eight virtues."\par
"It is our belief in them that sets us apart from the cruel invaders who would destroy all that we hold dear."\par
geof : "He is the Captain of the Guard."\par
moon,gate,ston,blac,orb : You show Lord British the black stone.\par
"Hmmmm... I have such a stone, as thou may recall."\par
"I did not know that there were more such orbs."\par
"'Twill serve thee well in thy travels if thou dost learn to master its powers."\par
"To open a gate, use the stone, and carefully position it a few feet from thee."\par
"Thou wilt discover that the placement is the key."\par
"In the proper positions, the stone canst conjure gates to take thee to numerous destinations."\par
mant,rune : "Ask the leaders of each town to tell thee of that.\par
comp : "Do thou ask Tholden."\par
thol : "He is my chancellor."\par
chan : "Aye, Tholden is my chancellor."\par
mous,sher : Sherry not in party : "Please take good care of my little friend."\par
Sherry in party : "Ah, thou hast heard of my little friend?"\par
"Her name is Sherry, and I'm quite proud of her."\par
"I'm certain she is the only talking mouse in all of Britannia."\par
"Thou art welcome to see her, if thou dost wish."\par
"Thou canst find her wandering throughout the castle."\par
"She comes by my room every night, so I can tell her stories."\par
wiza,oz,book : "I collect rare books."\par
"There's one in particular I've been hunting for many years."\par
"It's called 'The Wizard of Oz.' Ever heard of it?"\par
no-"Well, if thou dost run across it in thy travels, I would greatly appreciate if thou couldst bring it here."\par
"I hath promised a great reward to whosoever shalt bring me a copy."\par
Have book, full-"Thou art carrying too much for me to reward thee properly..."\par
"Bring the book back later, when thou art less burdened."\par
Have book, not full-"Thou hath found a copy!"\par
"Long hath I anticipated this moment..."\par
"Not since my childhood have I read this wondrous story."\par
Gingerly, he takes the tome. "Here is your reward." He gives you some glowing gems.\par
bedt,stor : "My favorite story is 'Hubert the Lion.'"\par
favo,hube,lion : "I've known it by heart, ever since I heard it as a child."\par
"Hubert the Lion was haughty and vain, and especially proud of his elegant mane."\par
"But conceit of this sort is not proper at all, and Hubert the Lion was due for a fall."\par
mr,nose : "Who told thee of that nickname!?"\par
"Well, I'd rather thou didst not call me that."\par
heal : Lord British waves his hand, and your whole party is healed!\par
than : "'Tis I who should thank thee, Avatar, for all thou hast done for Britannia."\par
bye : "May fortune favor thee."\par
other : "I cannot help thee with that."\par
Copy protection : "What doth trolls lack?"\par
"What part of the tangle vine doth put one to sleep?"\par
"How wert the headlesses produced?"\par
"What valued item canst one find near the spawning grounds of Hydras?"\par
"How canst one fend off rotworms?"\par
"How doth sea serpents attack?"\par
"What creature art wisps oft mistaken for?"\par
"How doth giant squids crush their prey?"\par
"Where hath images of the silver serpent been seen?"\par
\'f7"What art reapers remnants of?"\par
Correct : "Thou art correct."\par
Incorrect : "Nay, 'tis not the correct answer. Consult thy Compendium."\par
bye : "Find thy Compendium, then come speak with me again."\par
Nystul\par
Introduction : a concerned looking mage.\par
"Hail to thee <Gender>, and well met."\par
"'Twas I who learned of thy peril through my mystic arts, so that aid might be sent unto thee."\par
"Iolo, I saw that thou didst find a book."\par
"Might I examine it?"\par
Iolo doesn't have book : "I no longer have the book, milord." replies Iolo.\par
"That is too bad. I had hoped thou might take it to Mariah and have her translate it."\par
Iolo has book : "Certainly, milord. Perhaps thou canst make better sense of it than I." says Iolo.\par
"Strange..."\par
"This has a picture on its cover of a gargoyle standing with one foot on the chest of a slain human."\par
"This is interesting."\par
"It's written in a language I know not."\par
"Take it to Mariah at the Lycaeum, the finest scribe on the great Council of Wizards."\par
"She has studied many languages, and perhaps she can decipher this book for thee."\par
"One more thing, Avatar..."\par
"I noticed that thou didst arrive through a red gateway."\par
"Dost thou have the stone that opened the gate?"\par
yes-"From whence could it have come? The gargoyles, perhaps?"\par
"Best ask Lord British about it."\par
"I believe he has some knowledge of such items."\par
no-"Such items are quite rare."\par
"Indeed, the only one I have ever seen is that which Lord British himself possesses."\par
Subsequent visits : "Hast thou gone to the Lycaeum and shown Mariah the book? 'Tis most important."\par
"There is naught else I can help thee with at this time."\par
Geoffrey\par
Introduction : a tall, handsome man.\par
Not spoken to Lorn British : "Thou hadst best speak to Lord British before aught else."\par
Initial visit, spoken to Lord British : "I'm glad to see thee, <Avatar Name>. Perhaps thou canst prevail where others could not."\par
"I sent a party of ten to recapture the Shrine of Compassion from the gargoyles."\par
"Alas, they failed dismally."\par
"The survivors are recuperating in the town of Cove."\par
"Thou wouldst do well to speak with them first."\par
"Mayhap they learned something which might aid thee."\par
"I must confess I fear the worst."\par
"The gargoyles are such powerful foes, and they are spreading so fast..."\par
"Perhaps the end of the realm is nigh."\par
"Good luck, and my prayers go with thee."\par
Subsequent visits, spoken to Lord British : "Best not waste time talking..."\par
"Who knows what acts of villainy the gargoyles are comitting even as we speak?"\par
"I hope you've had a chance to visit Cove and speak with Gertan."\par
Sherry\par
Introduction : a cute little mouse.\par
Initial visit : "Squeak, squeak, squeak!"\par
"Talking to a mouse?" says Dupre.\par
"Methinks you're starting to imagine things..."\par
sque : "Squeak squirk?"\par
squi,nitt,fibl : "Squeeeeek!"\par
cat,meow,boo : "Eeeek!"\par
name : "I am Lord British's friend, Sherry."\par
lord,brit : "He reads me bedtime stories every night."\par
bed,stor,nigh : "He knows the one about Hubert the Lion by Heart!"\par
hube,lion : "That's my favorite story."\par
sher : "Pleased to meet you!"\par
help,rune,mous,hole,join : No cheese given : "Give me some cheese and ask me again."\par
Cheese given : On boat : "Boats make me seasick."\par
Party full : "With that many people I'd get trampled!"\par
If joined : "Travelling with you is fun! I hope we find some more cheese soon."\par
leav : "Oh, goodbye. Does this mean you want me to go home now?"\par
no-"Okay."\par
yes, on boat-"I'm not leaving until we get out of this thing!"\par
yes-"All right. Now I can hear my bedtime stories again!"\par
"I'll leave my stuff with you in case you need it."\par
kerc,bles,gesh,snee,dust : "I wish people would clean up under their beds and cabinets..."\par
"Dust mice are no friends of mine!"\par
chee : "Do you have any cheese?"\par
no-"Oh, that's too bad."\par
yes, no cheese-"I don't smell any cheese!"\par
yes'-"Can I have some?"\par
no-"Well, you're no fun."\par
yes-"Thank you very much!"\par
"I can help you! Do you want me to come with you?"\par
no-"Ok."\par
yes-"Great!"\par
bye : Not talked to : "Nitters fiblik."\par
talked to : "Come visit me again soon!"\par
other : "Kerchew!" -or- : The mouse wiggles its whiskers at you.\par
If in party : "You're funny!"\par
job : If in party : "I can slip through openings that are too small for you to fit through!"\par
Chuckles\par
Introduction : a carefree fellow in a ludicrous costume.\par
"Ho eyo he hum, I've got a clue! It's important, and just for you!"\par
name : "Why, I'm Chuckles the jester, of course! You've heard of me haven't you? Sure you have!"\par
hear : "You've heard a word? Why that's absurd!"\par
job : "To jape, to jeer, to prance, to frolic! To keep this place unmelancholic!"\par
"I practice tomfoolery for Lord British - or anyone else who passes too close."\par
jape : "And jeer!"\par
jeer : "And prance! To dance a Corybantic dance!"\par
pran,danc : "Jeer and prance! Prance and frolic!"\par
frol : "I lurch 'round like an alcoholic!"\par
tom : "'Cause Dick and Harry both called in sick."\par
lord,brit : "Call him Mr. Nose... But don't tell him I said so!"\par
mr,nose : "Shhh! Don't let him know I told you!"\par
clue\par
"Yes, it's crucial to your quest. Do you want to know what it is?"\par
yes-"Perhaps I don't want to tell you!"\par
no-"Perhaps I'll tell you anyway!"\par
"Do you think I will?"\par
yes-"How foolish of you to think so!"\par
no-"Congratulations! You're exactly right! I won't tell you the clue..."\par
"But I will give you this hint that may lead you to it..."\par
"Search the chest in Nystul's room."\par
hint : "If hints were mints and mints were hints, think what a world it would be!"\par
ques,ches : "A quest, a chest, oh what a jest!"\par
jest : "Have you heard the one about the nun, the dragon, and the drunken penguin?"\par
no"That's too bad... Neither have I!"\par
yes-"Good! Maybe you can teach it to me someday!"\par
"I did my best, did I amuse you? If not, I hope I did confuse you."\par
"Did you enjoy my jokes?\par
no-"Really? I'll just have to try harder, then!"\par
"Why is Dupre like a horseshoe?"\par
"It's because they both have the letter 'r' in them!"\par
yes-"You did? Then I'll tell you another one!"\par
"Riddle me this: Do you know what the goose said to the avatar?"\par
yes-"No, no, no, that's not how it works! You're supposed to say you don't, so I can tell you!"\par
"Let's try it again."\par
no-"It said 'ankh ankh!'"\par
"What did you think of that one?"\par
"Well, who asked you, anyway?"\par
"Oh, that's right, I did!"\par
"Hee hee, ho ho, to spread good cheer I go! Come talk to me again and I'll give you another show!"\par
teac,prea : "To teach, to preach, what waste of speech!"\par
mint,worl,spee,lurc,alco,word,absu,done : "I just said that!"\par
that : "You just said 'that!'"\par
nyst : "Oh, he's no fun."\par
fun : "I'll show you fun before I'm done!"\par
bye :\par
other : "Ho ho, hee hee, thou art funnier than me! To ask a jester of <Last Input>!"\par
Maldric\par
Introduction : a bare chested, muscular man, his body gleaming with sweat.\par
Initial visit : "Excuse me a moment." He pulls a napkin from his belt and mops at his brow. "Now, what were you saying?"\par
"Wait a minute," he interrupts, "I recognize you... You're the Avatar! I've always wanted to meet you."\par
female : From the day I first saw your portrait, I knew you must be the most beautiful woman in all Britannia."\par
male : You're the greatest hero in all the land."\par
Subsequent visits : female : "Oh, <Gender> Avatar, 'tis an unexpected pleasure to see you again!"\par
male : "Hey, my old buddy <Avatar Name>! Good to see you again."\par
name : "Maldric, I am. Once Maldric the boar hunter, now Maldric the cook."\par
once,boar,hunt : "Aye, I used to live in the forest and hunt wild boars."\par
"But one day I presented a roast boar as a gift to his majesty, and he liked it so much he hired me as his cook."\par
maje : "Yes, Lord British himself."\par
fore : "Those were good times. But I'm happy here."\par
pres,gift,roas,like : "The secret is in the spices. It's an old family recipe."\par
secr,fami,reci : "I'll never tell. female Though for one so sweet, I must say I'm tempted."\par
job : "I cook for all those who live in the castle, and for any guests who dine with Lord British as well."\par
"'Tis sastisfying work, yet at times I wish I could travel with one such as you..."\par
gues,dine : "Lord British has many friends."\par
cast : "A fancier home than any of my family ever lived in. Yet I still miss my simple hut in the forest."\par
If female : "I wish it were still there, so I could invite you to come spend an evening by the fireplace with me...\par
spen,even,fire,invi : "There's fire enough in my kitchen, but 'tis no place for romance."\par
kitc,plac,roma,trav,wish,join,warr : "I shouldn't even speak of such things."\par
"After all, you are the Avatar, and I but a lowly cook. Please forgive me."\par
lord,brit : "He's a good man. Likes plenty of pepper in his stew."\par
pepp,stew : "Spice puts some variety in life, is what I always say."\par
spic : If female : "You're a pretty spicy little number yourself!"\par
spic,vari,life,frie,hear,adve,peop,happ : "Yes indeed."\par
avat : "I've heard about all of your adventures. I wish I were a warrior too, and not just a cook!"\par
cook : "I like having a job where I can make people happy."\par
bye : "See you later. And next time you dine with his majesty, I'll cook you something special."\par
If female : He seems about to say more, with a hopeful look in his eyes.\par
But then he turns away without speaking.\par
other : "Funny you should mention that... It reminds me of my secret recipe for roast boar."\par
Cove\par
\par
Gilron\par
Introduction : a feverish looking warrior.\par
"....."\par
bye : "Ohhhhh..."\par
-or- : "Mrtlx hmlsh fbbn..."\par
-or- : "Mmmmmm..."\par
-or- : ".........."\par
-or- : "Rrrrlr Grrtl..."\par
Artegal\par
a heavily scarred man with a look of agony on his face.\par
Introduction : "The pain, the pain... Will it never stop?"\par
bye : "Too many... There were too many of them..."\par
-or- : "My head is pounding like a drum..."\par
-or- : "Oh, the pain!"\par
Gertan\par
Introduction : a burly man, who looks a little healthier than the other patients.\par
Initial visit : "Good (cough) day, <Gender>. What is thy name?"\par
"I am called Gertan. My fellows and I are recovering from a fierce battle."\par
Subsequent visits : "Tis good to see thee again, <Avatar Name>."\par
name : "Gertan, my friend."\par
job : "I lead my men into battle whenever Geoffrey sends me."\par
geof : "He is the captain of the guard."\par
capt,guar : "Aye."\par
fier,batt,shri,comp : "We sought to liberate the Shrine of Compassion."\par
"My men fought valiantly, but the gargoyles were too much for us. They didst slay more than half our party."\par
garg,slay,foug : "Aye, I doubt not they were using foul magic of some kind."\par
foul,magi : "A moonstone was upon the shrine, surrounded by a strange violet glow."\par
"I tried to get to it, but 'twas surrounded by some kind of force field."\par
moon,ston,forc,fiel,glow,viol : "'Tis a matter beyond my comprehension."\par
cave,frei : "Hast thou heard, then, of the time I slew the great dragon Freitag? Ah, that was a long time ago."\par
drag,slew : "Those were the days..."\par
bye : "May thy efforts meet with more success than mine!"\par
other : "I cannot help thee with that."\par
Ed\par
an unconcious man, his face twisted with pain.\par
He offers you no response.\par
Sasha_(U6)\par
Introduction : a pretty young nurse with violet eyes.\par
"Leave these men alone! Can't you see they need to rest?"\par
name : "My name is Sasha."\par
job : "I tend the sick. I know how to heal, cure, and resurrect."\par
rest,need,alon,leav,slee : "Aye, these men's wounds need time to heal."\par
woun,time,tend,sick : "Thou hast kept me from my duties long enough. Away with thee!"\par
heal : "More wounded? I'll do what I can."\par
The poor nurse seems weary beyond words.\par
Not wounded, Avatar solo : "Don't waste my time! Thou art not wounded!"\par
"'Tis hard enough tending to those truly sick. Begone!"\par
Not wounded, Avatar in party : Don't waste my time! None of you are wounded!"\par
"'Tis hard enough tending to those truly sick. Begone!"\par
If injured : "Which of you?"\par
"I see thy injury, <Character Name>."\par
"Wilt thou make an offering of 40 gold?"\par
yes-Sasha approaches <Character Name> and binds the wounds.\par
no-"If thou wilt not pay, I cannot heal thee."\par
yes, but no gold, low karma-"I'm sorry. Without an offering I cannot heal thee."\par
yes, but no gold, high karma-"Thou art poor, but thy cause is just."\par
"I will heal thee without payment."\par
Sasha approaches <Character Name> and binds the wounds.\par
"Is there aught else I can do for thee?"\par
cure : "Poison? Yes, I can cure that. Let me see..."\par
Not poisoned, solo : "Don't waste my time! Thou art not poisoned!"\par
"'Tis hard enough tending to those truly sick. Begone!"\par
Not poisoned, in group : "Don't waste my time! None of you are poisoned!"\par
"'Tis hard enough tending to those truly sick. Begone!"\par
If poisoned : "I sense that thou art poisoned, <Character Name>."\par
"Wilt thou make an offering of 15 gold?"\par
yes-Sasha grabs a vial and pours it down <Character Name>'s throat.\par
<Character Name> feels much better.\par
no-"If thou wilt not pay, I cannot cure thee."\par
yes, but no gold, karma low-"I'm sorry. Without an offering I cannot cure thee."\par
yes, but no gold, karma high-"Thou art poor, but thy cause is just."\par
"I will cure thee without payment."\par
Sasha grabs a vial and pours it down <Character Name>'s throat.\par
<Character Name> feels much better.\par
resu : Your question seems almost like a blow to the woman.\par
"Nay, I cannot. I no longer have the energy, or the reagents."\par
"It has been a dark, dark day indeed."\par
"I am sorry that I cannot help you, but we all grieve today."\par
ener,reag : "I have aided many today."\par
"These men are the last; they are beyond the help of all save time itself."\par
men,grie,toda,dark : "These soldiers are the only survivors of an attempt to free the Shrine of Compassion."\par
shri,comp : "Show thy compassion now and let them sleep."\par
bye : "Goodbye."\par
other : "I cannot help thee with that."\par
Ahrmaand\par
Introduction : a distinguished looking gentleman.\par
Subsequent visits if male : "Ah, <Avatar Name>, thou hast come back to get better acquainted!"\par
"<Avatar Name>, seeing thee again, I feel as if the clouds have parted to reveal the sun once more."\par
Subsequent visits if female : "Milady <Avatar Name>! If thou art as happy to see me as I to see thee, then this must be for thee a joyous occasion indeed."\par
Initial Visit : "Greetings, <Gender>, and welcome to the town of Cove."\par
Subsequent visits : "Ah, <Avatar Name>! 'Tis an honor to welcome thee once more to my humble village."\par
"How might I be of assistance this fine <Time of Day>?"\par
name : "I am the Viscount Ahrmaand. And what is thy name?"\par
"Well met, <Gender>!"\par
job : "I govern here in Cove. 'Tis hard work, but my people love me for it."\par
"I always thought it a blessing to live so close to a shrine, though since the gargoyles came none dare go near it."\par
cove,city : "We have fine facilities here for healing the wounded and the sick."\par
shri : "In Britannia there are eight shrines, one for each of the eight virtues of the Avatar."\par
"They are places where people can go to meditate on these virtues."\par
eigh,virt : "The virtues are honesty, compassion, valour, justice, sacrifice, honor, spirituality, and humility."\par
"'Tis good to meditate on these virtues often."\par
medi : "Each shrine has its own mantra. This is a chant which one should recite whilst meditating therein."\par
"Once there was a time when a special rune was required to enter each shrine as well."\par
"Now the gargoyles have taken the Shrine of Compassion, and it is lost to the people once more."\par
comp,sick,woun,gert,garg : "A party of adventurers came here after their attempt to defeat the gargoyles at the Shrine of Compassion."\par
"I spoke with their leader when they arrived."\par
"Thou shouldst speak with him thyself. He told of a strange violet energy field."\par
"I think mayhap 'tis similar to the force which blocked entry to the shrines many years ago."\par
"The eight mystic runes were most useful in those days."\par
lead : "He's in bed at Sasha's, recuperating."\par
forc,rune,myst,fiel,ener,viol : "Use the Rune of Compassion whilst chanting the Mantra of Compassion."\par
"Methinks this may negate the gargoyle's magic at that shrine."\par
chan,mant : "Ask Lord British's Chancellor, Tholden."\par
"He canst tell thee of the mantra, and like as not he will also know of the rune."\par
bye : If female : "Twas a delight to converse with thee, my dear."\par
"My heart will be aflutter with anticipation till thou dost visit me again."\par
If male : "Farewell sirrah, and good luck with thy quest."\par
other : "I cannot help thee with that."\par
Rudyom\par
Introduction : a dark, bearded man dressed in flowing white robes.\par
"Greetings, mighty Avatar. For what hast thou come to my place?"\par
buy,reag : If shop closed : "My shop is closed right now."\par
"Which of you?"\par
"Which of these?"\par
<Reagent Name> costs # per portion."\par
"How many dost thou want?"\par
Rudyom hands <Character Name> the <Item Name>.\par
Inventory sort of full : "Thou cannot carry that much!"\par
"I'll give thee #; thou dost not need the rest."\par
Inventory full : "Thou cannot carry any <Item Name>!"\par
Short on gold : "Thou cannot afford that much!"\par
"I'll give thee #; thou cannot have the rest."\par
No gold : "Thou cannot afford any <Item Name>!"\par
lear,spel : Buying spell without spellbook : "But thou hast not a spellbook!"\par
Buying spell and no group member has spellbook : "But none of you has a spellbook!"\par
If have spellbook : "Which of you?"\par
"In which Circle does <Character Name> wish to study?"\par
If don't answer 1 - 8 : "As everybody knows, there are only eight circles."\par
If no spell in that circle : "I have no spells of that circle."\par
If character can't cast spell level : "I sense that <Character Name> is only ready for the # Circle."\par
"But such matters are not my concern..."\par
"Perhaps <Character Name> is not ready for this circle."\par
"That spell costs # gold. Interested?"\par
yes-Rudyom hands <Character Name> a piece of rune-covered parchment.\par
yes, no gold-<Character Name> lacks the # gold required."\par
book : If not in shop : "My shop is closed right now."\par
If shop open : "Which of you?"\par
If inventory full : "But thou cannot carry a spellbook!"\par
Buying spellbook : "A spellbook costs 50 gold pieces. Interested?"\par
no-"Perhaps one of thy friends then."\par
ye, no gold-"But thou cannot afford a spellbook!"\par
name : "I am Rudyom."\par
job : "I sell magic books and reagents, and teach spells."\par
bye : "May peace follow thee, Avatar."\par
other : "Of that I will say nothing."\par
If not in shop : "My shop is closed right now."\par
Empath Abbey\par
\par
Mole\par
Introduction : a coarse looking individual, digging in the dirt with his bare hands.\par
"Hello. If I be speaking with ye, I'd best not be digging at the same time."\par
If have corpse : "Now, now. You can't be bringing bodies out here without no reservations."\par
"Go see me master Glen about having a funeral first."\par
Spoke to Glen first : You tell him what Glen said.\par
"Wants 'is graves dug, does he? Well, you can tell old zombie-face I'd do a lot better if I had a shovel!"\par
First time speaking to Glen : Mole listens, a bit impatiently.\par
"He gave me a shovel, all right - cheapest shovel I ever saw in all my years in the business!"\par
"Tell 'im it broke the third day I tried usin' it."\par
Second time speaking to Glen : "I'd have been glad to get a new shovel! Believe me, I knows how to pick out a good one, too."\par
"But how'm I supposed to pay for it, you just ask him that!"\par
Third time speaking to Glen : "Aye, maybe there'd 'ave been extra for shovel and such in my pay, if the old skinflint had ever remembered to pay me!"\par
Fourth time speaking to Glen : "Old penny pincher says he's going to pay me?" "I'll believe it when I have the coins in me hand."\par
name : "I be Mole."\par
dig,fath : "Digging's been in me family for generations."\par
grav : "If you take away enough dirt, a grave's what's left."\par
"After they has a funeral, I puts all the dirt back again."\par
fune : "Funerals aren't me trade. I know plenty about dirt, though."\par
dirt : "I knows all the different kinds of dirt by heart."\par
diff,kind,hear : "Learned 'em from me father."\par
trad,job : I dig graves for me master, Glen."\par
give : "What 'ave you got I could want? All I needs in me life is a good shovel."\par
shov : "'Tis the tool of me trade."\par
tool : "Me father said a good shovel is more important than a good @wife."\par
wife : That's what you look for after you've got a good shovel."\par
mast,glen\'f6 : "I'll not speak with 'im, the way he treats me."\par
"But if you sees him, tell him I could dig these graves better if I had a shovel!"\par
If have shovel : "He's a strange one... Nobody knows what he keeps in that back room of 'is."\par
bye : Oh, going away, are ye? Let me know when ye return, so I'll know 'tis time to speak with ye again."\par
He returns to his digging.\par
other : "I think ye'd best ask someone smarter than me."\par
If Avatar has shovel : "Oh, ye've brought a shovel with ye! Is it for me?"\par
no-"Too bad. I really need one."\par
yes-"Thank ye very much! And 'tis not even my birthday!"\par
"Let me tell you this - keep an eye on old Glen."\par
"They say not all of the bodies end up where they're supposed to..."\par
"You know, 'e was supposed to have paid me for a new shovel, and then you wouldn't have 'ad to go to so much trouble."\par
Glen\par
Introduction : a quiet, pale, almost motionless gentleman.\par
If realized didn't pay Mole : "Ohhh! Silly me, spending so much time with my clients." He gestures at the corpses.\par
"I forget little details like paying Mole..."\par
"I'll have to take care of it right away."\par
"You deserve a reward for helping me straighten this out."\par
"That mage over on the table was found just outside of town."\par
"He was carrying a couple of enchanted items and some money when the gargoyles got him."\par
"Nobody has been able to find any relatives of his, so you might as well take it all."\par
If Mole needs gold : "That addle-brained, lower class, miserable excuse for a common laborer..."\par
"I agreed to give him an equipment allowance with his pay."\par
"No doubt it's all been squandered at some tavern, along with the rest of his pay."\par
"See what he has to say about that!"\par
Mole's shovel broken : "So, his shovel broke? That's no excuse."\par
"Tell him he should have bought another one and kept working."\par
Mole needs a shovel : You pass along Mole's message. "Needs a shovel, does he? Tell him to use the one I gave him when I hired him!"\par
"No doubt he's forgotten he has it by now, or lost it somewhere..."\par
Usual visits : "Good evening." he says, in a voice that sends shivers down your spine.\par
"It is evening, I hope. That's my favorite time."\par
name : "I am Glen D'Arc, of the Trinsic D'Arcs."\par
trin,darc,d'ar : "I had to move away... Too sunny."\par
sun : "I much prefer moonlight. It's more natural and healthy."\par
prep,bod,depa : "For most clients, I prefer to use Frigid Solvol."\par
"It's the finest enbalming fluid on the market."\par
frig,solv,enba : "It gives the departed a nice, healthy glow..."\par
eter,rest : "Yes, those who cannot afford resurrection know the cool comfort of good, honest soil."\par
He sighs longingly. "How I envy them, for only the dead know true peace."\par
dead,ress : "He smiles. "I see you're not much of a believer in death."\par
"But next time you're dead you should try staying that way. You might like it..."\par
job : "I prepare the bodies of the departed for their eternal rest." He pauses to pop a grape into his mouth.\par
He chews it delicately, but you can still hear a soft, squishy sound.\par
"Would you like a few grapes?"\par
yes-"Help yourself."\par
no'-\par
"It's very relaxing work. At least it would be, if I didn't have to put up with that incompetent gravedigger."\par
If have body : His eyes gleam fiendishly when he notices the body you're carrying.\par
"Ah, you've brought me a client. Tell the truth, doesn't your friend look more peaceful this way?"\par
"For such a heroic client, I have something special to offer."\par
"It's a new process I've invented called 'cremation.'"\par
"For a mere fifteen gold, the remains of the dearly departed are purified with flame."\par
"Would you like me to do this for you?"\par
no-"Too bad."\par
yes, but no gold-"You're a bit short on gold." he says, disappointedly.\par
yes-"Excellent!" He takes the body, and recites a brief incantation.\par
An eerie green flame engulfs the corpse, consuming it in seconds.\par
Nothing but ashes remain. The mortician sweeps them up, puts them in an urn, and hands it to <Character Name>/you.\par
"Please come again if any more of your friends need my services."\par
inco,grav,mole : "You can't get good help these days..."\par
"Mole was supposed to have two more graves finished yesterday."\par
"I can't stand to talk to him any more - if you see him, tell him I need those graves dug immediately!"\par
bye : "Goodbye for now - I'm sure I'll see you again. Every body ends up here sooner or later..."\par
other : "Don't concern yourself with that. Life is too hectic as it is."\par
Sylaina\par
Introduction : a voluptuous woman dressed in dark blue velvet over white cloth.\par
If karma low : "Have you nothing better to do?" she asks pointedly. "Please excuse us."\par
Initial visit : "Hello there, stranger. Can I help you?"\par
Subsequent visits : "Hello, <Gender>."\par
name : "I'm Sylaina Moorehead."\par
job : "When I need some money for food and such, I work as a seamstress."\par
"Most of the time, however, I live off the seashore."\par
seam,sew,embr,clot : "Yes. I used to make such fine clothes for my Nathaniel..."\par
nath : "Though he was not a bad husband, I'll always remember him as something of a scoundrel."\par
She smiles and her lovely eyes sparkle with memories.\par
"They say he went down in a storm. He was a pirate."\par
moor : "I'm a widow now. I live in a cottage on the beach."\par
sea,surf,ocea,beac,seas : "There's always a bit of fish or gull's eggs to eat, with lobster once in a while."\par
"I'm as carefree as a gypsy."\par
wido : "My husband left me a little money, to support myself for a time, but I still like to sew fine clothing."\par
"There are few things as relaxing as embroidering and sitting by the ocean, listening to the surf."\'b0\par
gyps : "They travel the road between Britain and Trinsic."\par
"Normally I like them. They're a merry lot."\par
"But one time a group of gypsies stole my prized locket!"\par
lock : "My husband left me a gold locket."\par
"It contained a piece of an old ship's chart. He said that chart would make me rich."\par
"I didn't really care about the chart. But the locket..."\par
"That locket was all I had to remember Nathaniel by."\par
She sighs and looks away for a moment.\par
pira,map : "My husband left me a gold locket wrapped in a piece of an old ship's chart. Maybe that's what you seek."\par
"I don't have the locket or the map anymore. The gypsies came by one day and stole them."\par
stol : "Yes--some gypsies are trustworthy, but others are scoundrels!"\par
bye : "Bye-bye."\par
other : "Sorry, I cannot help you with that."\par
Stephanie\par
Introduction : a young woman who stares into the distance.\par
Subsequent visits : "I recognize your voice." She smiles.\par
Initial visit : "Hello? Is someone there?"\par
name : "Stephanie, but you can call me 'Steph.'"\par
step : "That's better."\par
heal : If shop closed : "Come to my shop when I'm open!"\par
If healthy : After touching your brow she states, "You feel fine to me."\par
-or- : She feels each brow and holds her ear close to your mouths.\par
If unhealthy : "Which of you?"\par
"I sense your injury, <Character Name>."\par
"Will you make an offering of 25 gold?"\par
yes-She closes her eyes, puts a delicate hand on your brow and chants softly.\par
You feel much better.\par
no-"I cannot heal you if you won't tithe."\par
yes, but no gold : low karma : "I'm sorry. Without an offering I cannot heal you."\par
high karma : "I sense your hesitation is based on your empty pockets."\par
"I also sense your cause is a just one."\par
She closes her eyes, puts a delicate hand on your brow and chants softly.\par
You feel much better.\par
Her blue eyes pierce you. "What else can I do for you?"\par
cure : If shop closed : "Come to my shop when I'm open!"\par
If not poisoned : She lifts your hand against her lips. "You are not poisoned."\par
-or- : Holding each hand against her lips she states "You are not poisoned."\par
If poisoned : "Which of you?"\par
"I sense that you are poisoned, <Character Name>."\par
"Will you make an offering of 5 gold?"\par
yes-Placing your hand over her heart, she closes her eyes and whispers something.\par
The fever leaves your brow.\par
no-"Without the offering I cannot cure you."\par
yes, but not enough gold : "I'm sorry. Without an offering I cannot cure you."\par
A tear comes to her eyes.\par
"I should have known you would not ask unless you were in grave need."\par
"Come, put your hand on my heart."\par
Placing your hand over her heart, she closes her eyes and whispers something.\par
The fever leaves your brow.\par
resu : If all alive : "But I sense none with you are dead."\par
If shop closed : "Come to my shop when I'm open!"\par
If shop open : "I sense that someone has met a terrible fate." "Will you make an offering of 350 gold?"\par
no-"Then there is nothing I can do save grieve with you."\par
yes, but not enough gold-"You haven't enough gold."\par
"I'm sorry, all I can do is grieve with you."\par
yes, have enough gold<-Your party takes up a collection for their fallen comrade.\par
<NPC Name> lays hands upon the corpse...\par
"Doman..."\par
"thixus..."\par
"anretu!"\par
And the dead live again!\par
If more dead : "I sense that others have been lost as well..."\par
job : "We have no 'jobs' here as such."\par
"But I can heal, cure and resurrect."\par
bye : "Good <Time of Day>, my friend. Take care." Her long lashes flitter a moment.\par
other : "I don't think I'm the one to ask that of."\par
Faren\par
Introduction : a good looking young man with a wine glass in his hand.\par
Initial visit : "Hello," he says, extending a delicate hand.\par
Subsequent visits : "I have seen your face before," he says, cocking his head sideways.\par
"What is it you need?"\par
name : "Faren."\par
"Faren the drunk as some call me." He winks at you.\par
drun : "Just kidding." He smiles broadly.\par
fare : "You might have noticed the similarity between my sister and me."\par
sist : "A beautiful lass Stephanie is."\par
step : "Have you met her? Then you know she is blind."\par
blin : "Yes, has been so since birth."\par
"For her it is like being born a gargoyle."\par
garg : "She knows no other life. It is her lot to make the best of her situation."\par
"In this she is no different than you or I." He pauses to gather his thoughts.\par
"Even gargoyles face this dilemma, I'll wager."\par
"But we know them more by the ways they differ from us, rather than their similarities."\par
buy,wine : <Character Name>\par
"Which of you?"\par
"Which item?"\par
White WineRed WineDry WineSweet WineAbbey RedAbbey Dry : <NPC Name> smiles at <Character Name>. "For <Character Name> it will cost you # gold. Interested?"\par
yes, but full-<NPC Name> glances at <Character Name>, "You look pretty full to me."\par
yes-"Excellent!" After accepting <Character Name>'s gold, <NPC Name> hands over the wine.\par
"Enjoy your <Item Name>\par
yes, but not enough gold-<NPC Name> looks at <Character Name>. "You don't have enough gold."\par
no-"Too bad, it's really good wine."\par
job : "I sell many types of wine, made right here." He clicks his tongue.\par
bye : "Have a nice <Time of Day>." He sips his wineglass.\par
other : He scratches his head and looks around.\par
Zeke\par
Introduction : a strong looking man with just one arm.\par
"Hello," he shouts, waving.\par
If met Zeke : "You've met Zeke before, 'aven't ya?" he says, glaring at you.\par
"What d'ya need?"\par
name : "Zeke the one-armed beekeep, it is."\par
zeke : "Lost me arm and gained that name in battle." He flashes a yellowed grin at you.\par
batt : "'Twas a horrid affair, but Mondain had to be thwarted."\par
mond : "You must be new here." He looks to the ground.\par
"He brought an age of great evil unto our land."\par
"Yet try and tell today's children of the age of darkness..."\par
"They believe nothing can go wrong, as long as the Avatar lives."\par
buy,hone : "Which of you?"\par
"It'll cost you 10 gold for the 'oney, interested?"\par
yes, but full-"You look pretty full to me."\par
yes-"Excellent!" After accepting <Character Name>'s gold, <NPC Name.. hands over the honey.\par
yes, but not enough gold-<NPC Name> looks at <Character Name>. "You ain't that good-looking. My price is 10 gold."\par
Purchase successful : "Enjoy your 'oney."\par
no-"You'll find none better."\par
sell : If no bottles : "Sorry, none of you has anything I need."\par
If have bottles : "Which of you?"\par
<NPC Name> turns to <Character Name>, and says "Will you take 7 gold for that honey jar?"\par
yes-"Done!" He hands <Character Name> 7 gold pieces and takes the honey jar.\par
yes, but no jars-"Sorry, you 'aven't any 'oney jars."\par
no-"Changed your mind, eh?" he folds his arms.\par
bee : "Bees are true friends. They work all day, making honey and scattering pollen."\par
"All we have to do is provide them with hives."\par
He laughs. "And get stung once in a while!"\par
hive : "I buys all my hives from a nice lady in Minoc named Michelle."\par
"She weaves them out of straw."\par
job : "I'm the beekeeper here at the abbey."\par
"If you want to buy honey, or sell me a honey jar I'm all ears (if only one-armed)."\par
bye : "Have a nice <Time of Day>."\par
other : He scratches his head and looks around.\par
Eckhart\par
Introduction : a gnarled man with knobby muscles.\par
"Hullo, <Gender>." He touches his cap respectfully.\par
He has a very sharp knife with which he prunes off less productive branches.\par
"Mind that you stay out of the flight paths of the bees, <Gender>."\par
name : "Eckhart the vinekeeper, at your service, ma'am/sir."\par
bees,hone,mead : You notice the bees have regular aerial routes all about the vineyard.\par
"Zeke keeps bees on the other side of the abbey, <Gender>."\par
job : "I care for the garden and tend the vines."\par
gard,care : "Some of our rosebushes were planted by druids hundreds of years ago."\par
"Eventually, we became the Brotherhood of the Rose."\par
vine,tend : If in garden : "These rows," he gestures, "are seedless grapes."\par
If not in garden : "Here at the abbey we grow seedless grapes."\par
seed,less : "Amazing, ain't it, <Gender>. The enchanter made them for us."\par
"Now I grow new vines by grafting seedless grapevines onto regular rootstocks."\par
nico,ench : "Yes, <Gender>. He lives east of here, between two rivers."\par
"His hut be due north of Britain, or so they tell me."\par
grap : If not it garden : "Visit me in the fields some time and I'll give you some!"\par
If in garden : "Now those grapes there are for making wine."\par
If Dupre in party : Dupre says "I cannot say which I like better: wine from grapes or mead from honey!"\par
"And these over here are for eating."\par
He gives you a plump little bunch of sweet table grapes.\par
wine : "Ask Faren of that."\par
fare : "Yes, Faren--the local winemaker."\par
bye : He waves and turns back to work.\par
-or- : Eckhart waves goodbye.\par
other : "Beg pardon, <Gender>?"\par
Jhelom\par
\par
Zellivan\par
Introduction : a man with a serpent-and-heart tabard covering his chainmail.\par
Subsequent visits : "Good <Time of Day>. We meet again."\par
Initial visit : "I welcome thee to Jhelom."\par
"I am Zellivan, and I am lord here."\par
"Pray tell me thy name."\par
Give true name : "Ah, the Avatar! Lord British has spoken fondly of thee, <Gender>."\par
Give wrong name : "Please feel at home in this town."\par
name : "Thou mayst call me Zellivan."\par
job : "The valorous are often boisterous. I watch over the fighters."\par
rune : "I held a tournament, to decide who would be entrusted with the rune's care."\par
"You might say that 'no man' was the victor..." He smiles.\par
mant : "Hear it for thyself at the Sword and Keg Pub, <Gender>."\par
"The songs and tales do the heart good, I say!"\par
tour,vict,no,man,noma : "Ask him yourself!"\par
song,tale,figh : "Those who live the warriors' life like to sing, and to regale one another with fanciful accounts of their exploits."\par
valo,vict : "Here in Jhelom we delight in the clash of arms and the din of battle."\par
arms,armo : "Speak to Nomaan if thou hast need of arms."\par
swor,keg,pub : "If thou hast tales of swordsmanship, then the Sword and Keg is the place for thee."\par
"'Tis on the north side of town."\par
batt : "Ah, battle!" he sighs.\par
For a time he reminisces with you, trading stories about past exploits.\par
eart,quak : "Only an earthquake could make Jhelom tremble, I daresay."\par
"We had one just last year."\par
"The piers were broken up, but the shipwrights repaired them swiftly."\par
pier,ship,harb : "The shipwrights of Jhelom are fastidious and frugal craftsmen."\par
lord,brit : "I grew up near Castle Britannia."\par
"'Twas the sunset o'er Brittany Bay and the ships at rest in the harbor which drew me away to the sea."\par
bye : "Farewell, my friend."\par
other : "I cannot help thee with that."\par
Nomaan\par
Introduction : a blond man with broad shoulders and a stern, unsmiling face.\par
Brawling'\par
"Can't you see there's a lovely brawl going on? Talk to me tomorrow."\par
Subsequent visits : "Hello again, <Gender>."\'b03\'a3"I am Nomaan. What is thy name, <Gender>?"\par
He bows stiffly. "Well met, <Gender>."\'a4\'d3\'a7\'a7\'b03\'a2\par
Initial visit : "What else can I help thee with?"\par
buy : "Certainly, <Gender>."\par
"Wouldst thou like armaments or ammunition?"\par
arm : Shop closed : "Come by my shop when I'm open!"\par
Shop open : "Which of you?"\par
"Which item?"\par
"That <Item Name> costs # gold."\par
"Interested, <Character Name>?"\par
yes, full-"But 'twould make thee o'erburdened, <Character Name>!"\par
yes-"Excellent!"\par
After accepting <Character Name>'s gold, <NPC Name> hands over the <Item Name>.\par
yes, no gold-"But thou hast not enough gold, <Character Name>!"\par
no-\par
amm : Shop closed : "Come by my shop when I'm open!"\par
Shop open : "Which of you?"\par
1) Arrows\par
2) Bolts\par
"Which kind?"\par
"I only sell <Item Name>s by the dozen."\par
"How many dozens do you want, <Character Name>?"\par
"Excellent!"\par
Can afford/carry amount : After accepting <Character Name>'s gold, <NPC Name> hands over # <Item Name>s.\par
Can afford/not carry amount : "Thou canst not carry that many, but I will give thee # <Item Name>s, <Character Name>."\par
Can not carry any : "Thou canst not carry any <Item Name>s, <Character Name>!"\par
Can carry/not afford amount : "Thou canst not afford that many, but I will give thee # <Item Name>s, <Character Name>."\par
Can not afford any : "Thou canst not afford any <Item Name>s, <Character Name>!"\par
sell : Shop closed : "Come by my shop when I'm open!"\par
Shop open : Have nothing : "Sorry, none of you has anything I need."\par
Have item : "Aye, <Character Name> has something of interest..."\par
No character selected : "Changed your mind, eh?"\par
Character selected : "Which of you?"\par
"Which item?"\par
"Will you take # gold for that <Item Name>, <Character Name>?"\par
no-"Perhaps some other time, then."\par
No item selected-"Perhaps something else then?"\par
yes-"Done!" <NPC Name> hands <Character Name> # gold pieces and takes the <Item Name>\par
"Changed your mind, eh?"\par
name : "Naughty Nomaan, they call me."\par
job : "I run the armoury, buying and selling weapons."\par
naug : "'Tis just a nickname, of course."\par
You see a hint of a smile on his face.\par
rune : "I won a rune in a tournament once."\par
"'Tis gone now, though - and there's a fine tale about it!"\par
gone,tale : "I remember it as if it were yesterday..."\par
"Zellivan held a tourney and I was awarded the Rune of Valour."\par
"Afterwards, we were at the pub, celebrating."\par
"I had drunk a full quart of ale, so my grip was a bit unsteady."\par
"I was showing the rune around when it fell from my grasp onto the floor."\par
"That's when the rat ran out."\par
rat : "It scampered over, seized the trinket and ran back 'cross the floor."\par
"We all leapt at it, but the little beast was too quick."\par
"It was in the hole before anybody could stop it."\par
hole : "It ran into a hole in the west wall of the pub, carrying the rune."\par
"We tried everything - banging on the wall, digging, poking with a sword."\par
"To no avail, though. We haven't seen the rune since."\par
mant : "Go ask around in the tavern."\par
bye : "A fine <Time of Day> to you, <Gender>."\par
other : "Hmm..."\par
"Nope, I fear I know nothing of that, <Gender>."\par
Stelnar\par
Introduction : an angry-looking man wearing short swords on either hip.\par
Brawling : He was just about to punch someone when you approached him.\par
"This is no time for talk. There's fighting to do!"\par
Subsequent visits : "Good <Time of Day>."\par
Initial visit : "Ho there, <Gender>!"\par
If Shamino in party : "Good <Time of Day>, Stelnar." Shamino and Stelnar shake hands. "<Avatar Name>, this is Stelnar Starhelm."\par
"Pleased to meet you, <Gender> <Avatar Name>."\par
name : "I'm called Starhelm."\par
arvi : "Arvin? He seems a good sort."\par
culh : "He's a bard. I do not really know him."\par
jerr : "Oh, yes. Brave fellow."\par
sham,rang : "Shamino and I travelled the Spiritwood together for a time."\par
job : "I am a monster-slayer."\par
mons,slay : "I hate all monsters. They are a blight on the face of Britannia!"\par
"For the past year I've been killing wisps and the like in Spiritwood."\par
blig,spir,wisp : "Wisps are nasty flickers, very hard to kill. Not like gargoyles, now."\par
garg : "There's one that they call Sin 'Vraal."\par
"If I had my way, that gargoyle would be a statue."\par
stat : "They turn to stone when ye slay them."\par
"That's drivel, friend Starhelm!" says Van Kellian.\par
"A gargoyle's a flesh and blood beast."\par
"Stone indeed!"\par
"Bards! A gargoyle is an ugly monster, and that's that."\par
ugly : "Van murmurs "Ugliness is but skin deep, just as beauty is."\par
"Gargoyle skin is very thick and deep, as everyone knows."\par
"Never trust anything ugly."\par
sin,vraa,'vra : "He's a vicious daemon."\par
daem,demo : "Yes, Sin 'Vraal is an evil wretch."\par
"How could Lord British imagine that a gargoyle could understand virtue?"\par
lord,brit,virt : "Lord British defeated Sin 'Vraal in the underworld."\par
"The gargoyle went to live in the Dry Land."\par
dry,land : "'Tis a desert east of the Bloody Plains. There is a shrine there."\par
shri,dese : "I've never been to that desert, or the Shrine of Honesty."\par
bye : "Farewell, <Avatar Name>."\par
-or- : "Have a pleasant <Time of Day>, <Gender>."\par
other : I cannot help ye with that."\par
Van Kellian\par
Introduction : a man dressed in velvets and silks of yellow, green and blue.\par
His voice is rich and mellow.\par
Brawling : He glances behind him and ducks, as if expecting someone to throw something at him.\par
"Bit of a brawl going on just now. Be glad to talk to you some other time."\par
Not brawling : "How do you do. I am the bard Van Kellian."\par
"Please, speak your name, <Gender>."\par
"A pleasure, to be sure, <Last Input>."\par
Subsequent visits : "A very good <Time of Day> to ye, my friend."\par
name : "Call me Van."\par
job : "Why, singing is my trade."\par
"Songs to soothe the soul and refresh the mind."\par
"Shall I sing for ye?"\par
If Iolo in party : Iolo rolls his eyes and whispers to you.\par
"He believes he does us a favor. This I must hear."\par
"Well? How about a song?"\par
no-"Well, perhaps another time, then."\par
yes-The bard plays a harp and sings.\par
"Tho' she disdains to speak to me \par
Ah how I pine and sigh for her\par
I would that I were handsome\par
Sing ho eyo he hum!"\par
sing,song : "'Tis such a topsy-turvy world When my sweet lady-love whirls by\par
I would that I could catch her eye\par
Sing ho eyo he hum!"\par
mant : "Did ye know that the mantra of pride is 'mul?' A beggar told me that."\par
prid,begg,mul : "There is little enough dignity in the life of a beggar."\par
"I gave him a few coins, of course."\par
stel,star : "Starhelm and I have often debated the nature of the gargoyle Sin 'Vraal."\par
sin,vraa,'vra : "If Lord British suffers him to live, then I will not harm him."\par
"What possible threat could one gargoyle living alone in the Dry Lands be?"\par
Stelnar says "I'll tell ye, Van."\par
"If ye let one gargoyle live, then ye'll be tempted to spare trolls, and then even cyclopses."\par
"And then ye forget valour, and soon ye are overrun by monsters!"\par
valo,comp : "Valour comes from the courage to be virtuous."\par
"Just as compassion comes from a love of all mankind."\par
"Aha! That means monsters are not deserving of mercy!" says Stelnar\par
"Courage grows. Why not love?"\par
garg : "Well, I hear their skin is stony and rough."\par
"Their cries are fierce yowlings to make the blood run cold with fear."\par
"Though, mind ye, I myself have never faced one in combat."\par
bye : "Good <Time of Day>, and farewell."\par
other : "Hmm. No, I cannot help ye with that."\par
Heftimus McPry\par
Introduction : a beggar, clad in the rags of a sailor, with a hook for a right hand.\par
"Spare a doubloon fer an old seahand?" He holds out his hand.\par
Do you give him any money?\par
no-"Pah!" He spits on the ground.\par
yes-How much do you give?\par
No gold-You do not have that much.\par
Have gold-"Thank, ye kindly, matey."\par
name : "I be Heftimus McPry, matey."\par
job : "Once Buccaneer's Den quaked at the mention o' me name."\par
"I was the greatest sabre fighter on all the high seas."\par
"Then one day..."\par
"I fought Captain Hawkins, that scurvy dog, an' he struck off me hand with his sword."\par
hook,foug,stru,hand,swor : "'Twas a bitter fight; I almost died o' the wound."\par
"Hawkins threw me hand to the sharks."\par
capt,hawk : "He be long gone now, he an' his ship the Empire. A pox on his memory!"\par
bucc,den : "That be an island, matey, and no place fer a decent soul like yerself."\par
map : "That bit o' news will cost ye twenty coins. What say ye, matey? Aye or nay?"\par
no-"Then maybe ten? Aye or nay?"\par
no-"So be it, matey."\par
yes-"I thank ye kindly, matey. The last I saw o' that bit o' parchment..."\par
"I needed it to start a fire in a dungeon."\par
"But afore I could apply sparks to the tinder, a huge swarm o' rats drove me away."\par
"The scrap o' map lies in the dungeon Wrong, matey."\par
dung : "I've been into the dungeon Wrong."\par
"There's a cave on this island that looks a lot safer."\par
cave : "I sleep in front of it every night."\par
"Soon as I've saved up a stake, I'm going in there to dig for gold."\par
wron : "'Twas certainly the wrong place for an old seadog to be!"\par
He laughs, chokes, and coughs for a while.\par
"I'll be allright, matey."\par
bye : "Good journey."\par
other : "Sorry, don't really know that."\par
Lyssandra\par
Introduction : a girl of perhaps twelve years.\par
She is agile, and balances trays of mugs deftly on each hand.\par
It is a wonder how she can duck the hurled debris and avoid the flying fists.\par
She is quick, and never spills a drop of ale.\par
"Hallo, <Gender>. Welcome to the 'Sword and Keg.'"\par
swor,keg,drin,orde : "Sometimes 'tis rough here but I doesn't mind."\par
"Some day I'll be a fighter, ye know."\par
name : "It's Lyssandra, but ye can call me Andy."\par
Andy : "I know 'tis a boy's name, but I like it all the same."\par
job,mug : "I take orders for drinks, <Gender>."\par
figh,braw : "The fighting here usually begins over--"\par
Her voice drops to a whisper, "--the rat!"\par
"Around sunset things get really rowdy here!"\par
rat,mous : "Shhh!" She glances about to see if you have been overheard.\par
"See yon hole in the north wall?"\par
"Look carefully at where floor and wall meet."\par
"That's where it took the rune!"\par
"They tried all manner of tricks to get it out but they all failed."\par
"I had an idea, but nobody listened to me."\par
idea,list : "Do ye know of the talking mouse? Lord British's friend?"\par
no-"Well, ye would think it was a dumb idea anyways..."\par
yes-"A mouse could get the rune, of that I'm sure!"\par
rune : "I know how to get it from the you-know-what."\par
what,you,how : "The rat," she whispers conspiratorially to you.\par
mant : "Culham has oft sung of it, with Jerris and Starhelm."\par
Star : "His real name is Stelnar."\par
"He would be much nicer if he were not so angry all the time."\par
Jerr : "He is brave when fighting, but he is afraid to sing by himself."\par
bye : "Bye-bye, <Gender>. It was nice talking to you."\par
other : "I cannot help ye with that."\par
Culham\par
Introduction : a small man in a handsome vest made of seashells.\par
Brawling : "It's fighting time. Talking's for later."\par
Initial visit : "Why, hullo there, <Gender>. And who might ye be?"\par
Gave name : "Well met, <Gender> <Last Input>. Let me tell ye a tale."\par
Didn't give name : "Oho, that be a name in need of a story."\par
Subsequent visits, gave name : "Why, hullo there, <Avatar Name>. Have I told ye the one about the gypsies?"\par
yes-"Oh. Perhaps a song, then."\par
no-"Now there's a tale."\par
name : "Culham's me name, <Gender>."\par
job : "When spirits be low, I play tunes to bring cheer."\par
spir : "Once I heard a haunting melody..."\par
"...in Old Magincia." He laughs.\par
old,magi,haun : "Well, it used to be a ghost town."\par
He laughs and plays a little tune on his lute.\par
chee,mant : "The Mantra of Valour bringeth great cheer."\par
"I'm not a great singer, but I love to play a song of valour."\par
"It makes me sing."\par
sing,song : "I'll sing, though I'd rather play."\par
gyps,hear,tell,tale,stor : "Would ye really like to hear a story?"\par
no-"Well, not everyone likes gypsy tales, I suppose."\par
yes-"I call this story..."\par
"Arturosis"\par
"Two gypsies come to Trinsic, hungry as usual."\par
"One goes out and gathers a poisonous weed from the swamps."\par
"The other sneaks into town and puts the plant into the trough of a horse."\par
"Well, poor horse doesn't know better."\par
"He eats the stuff, swells up and takes ill."\par
"The owner, Immanuelle, doesn't know what to do."\par
"Along come the gypsies. 'Aiee!' they cry."\par
"'Yonder nag hath contracted 'Arturosis.'"\par
"Unless it be immediately removed, the rest shall catch the same fatal disease.'"\par
"Immanuelle decides to sacrifice the diseased one and the gypsies agree heartily."\par
"'For but a few coins,' say the gypsies,' we will lead it away and bury it far from here.'"\par
"Immanuelle is too happy to hand them the doomed animal's bridle, plus ten coins."\par
"So the gypsies make a great kettle of horse stew and bury the rest."\par
"A great feast is held 'mongst gypsykind."\par
"Meanwhile, Immanuelle thanks virtue that the equine epidemic was caught early on!"\par
"'Tis a true story, my friend."\par
play,tune : The pub is filled with the sound of singing.\par
Culham sings for you.\par
"It seemed like such an easy climb \par
I crawled upon the Serpent's Spine \par
I hadn't even time to blanch \par
When down there came an avalanche!"\par
"And then my mantra came to mind \par
'Tho boulders bounced and passed with speed. \par
My frozen fingers gripped to rock \par
As sliding snow swept loose my feet."\par
"Sing 'ra,' my friends, sing 'ra.' \par
'Tis a song to make thee strong \par
When the mountains be high \par
And the ground be far..."\par
"...Sing 'ra,' my friends, sing 'ra'!"\'b0\par
rune,mous,rat,naug,noma : "Ah, yes. That's quite a story, too."\par
"Naughty Nomaan dropped the Rune of Valor, and the rat carried it off."\par
He laughs loudly.\par
If bar full : Too loudly. Stelnar and Jerris begin to argue over whether it was a rat or a mouse.\par
Once again a brawl breaks out!\par
bye : "May we meet again soon, friend."\par
other : "Sorry, I cannot help ye with that."\par
Jerris\par
Introduction : a slender man with boots that come up to his thighs.\par
brawling : "Don't you know it's rude to interrupt a man when he's brawling?"\par
Not brawling : "Hello there, <Gender>."\par
"Care to join me in a drink?"\par
no-"Not a mead drinker, I guess." He shrugs.\par
yes-He hands you a mug for a swallow.\par
It is warmed mead, sweet and bubbly, with a cinnamon stick in it.\par
"Comes from Verity Isle," he says.\par
veri,mead,isle,mug : "It's mostly made of honey. Ask a brewer."\par
name : "Jerris is my name. And yourself?"\par
"Pleased to make your acquaintance."\par
job : "Some day I hope to join Zellivan's Stalwarts and be a guard."\par
zell,stal,guar : "When that last earthquake struck, I was pinned 'neath a great tree branch."\par
"Lord Zellivan himself hoisted it up while a guard pulled me clear."\par
mous,rat : "It was a rat, as sure as the world is flat."\par
"Darndest thing, too."\par
"Nomaan dropped the rune and the rat took it into a little hole."\par
hole,rune : "It's right there. On the north wall. See it?"\par
no-"Look carefully, <Gender>. Ye will see it if ye keep on looking."\par
Shamino points to a spot west of the bar where the wall meets the ground. "There it is."\par
yes : Obviously a rat hole."\par
mant : "It's in the refrain of the song."\par
sing,song,refr : "Well, I'd rather not sing alone. Get Culham to play it."\par
bye : "Goodbye."\par
other : "Sorry, <Gender>. I can't help ye with that."\par
Arvin\par
Introduction : a tavernkeeper.\par
If cooking : The man looks up from his cooking. "Aye, hello there."\par
"'Fraid I can't talk now. I have to cook tonight's supper/tomorrow's lunch."\par
"Come back when it's ready and have some!"\par
If not cooking : "Welcome to the Sword and Keg."\par
"Anything else I can do for you?"\par
name : "I be Arvin, mate."\par
buy : Which, rolls, ale, mead, wine, or rations?"\par
job : I sell rolls, ale, mead, wine, and rations."\par
roll : "Which of you?"\par
"That'll be 2 crowns, okay?"\par
yes, no gold-"Come back when you have some gold."\par
yes, no room-"You don't have room to carry it."\par
yes-<NPC Name> gives <Character Name> the rolls.\par
"They're good with butter, ya know."\par
mead,ale,wine : "Which of you?"\par
"That'll be # crowns. All right?"\par
yes, no gold-"Come back when you have some gold."\par
yes, full-"You don't have room to carry it."\par
yes-"All right." <NPC Name> gives <Character Name> the <Item Name>.\par
"Enjoy the drink, matey."\par
no-\par
rati : "Which of you?"\par
"Rations are 4 gold apiece. How many do you want?"\par
no room : <NPC Name> looks at <Character Name>. "You haven't any room in your pack."\par
no gold : "Come back when you have some gold."\par
Enough gold/room : <NPC Name> hands the rations to <Character Name>.\par
Short on gold/room for desired amount : He hands <Character Name> # mutton ration(s). "That's all you can carry."\par
-or- : "That's all you can afford."\par
no,bye : "See you later."\par
other : "I can't help you with that."\par
Martin\par
Introduction : a jolly, red-faced innkeeper.\par
"Vell, hello again/dere, mine friend! Velcome to the Varrior's Stead!"\par
"Vat can I be doing for thee this <Time of Day>?"\par
name : "Mine name ist Martin, but my friends call me 'Dutch.'"\par
dutc : "Ja, dat's mine name!"\par
job : "I run dis inn."\par
rest,inn,room : Room und board ist 5 gold per night per person."\par
"Interested?"\par
no-"Vell, perhaps some other time, ja?"\par
yes, no gold-"Ach, I'm sorry, but I must haf my # gold."\par
"Come back ven fortune makes you rich, ah?"\par
yes-He shows you to your room, and you drift off into a well-earned sleep.\par
The next morning, Martin serves you a huge, tasty breakfast.\par
"A good breakfast is the beginning of a good day!" he cries.\par
bye : "Haf a good journey!" he calls as you leave.\par
other : I speak your language not so good. Vat is meaning '<Last Input>'\par
Peer (NPC)\par
Introduction : a tall, muscled man with a wide grin.\par
Subsequent visits : \'a7He squints at you. "We've met, haven't we?"\par
Initial visit : "Hello," he says, lumbering over to you and extending a large hand.\par
"What can I do for ya?"\par
name : "Peer."\par
peer : "My father was a sailor, but couldn't spell." He laughs out loud.\par
sail,fath : "And his father before him."\par
buy, job : If bought all vessels : "You bought my last craft!"\par
If vessels remain : "I sell ships and skiffs."\par
If only ships remain : "I sell ships : If only skiffs remain : "I sell skiffs :\par
ship : If bought all ships : "Sorry, I sold you my last ship."\par
If ships available : "Which of you?"\par
<NPC Name> turns to <Character Name>. "It'll cost you # gold for the deed. Interested?"\par
yes, full-"You look pretty full to me, <Character Name>."\par
yes, avatar solo, no gold-"Thou hast not enough gold."\par
yes, avatar in party, no gold-"Thy party hast not enough gold."\par
yes, avatar in party, group gold-Your party takes up a collection to purchase the vessel.\par
yes-"Excellent!" After accepting the gold, <NPC Name> hands <Character Name> the deed.\par
"Sail her straight."\par
-or- : "You'll ne'er find a better craft."\par
skif : If bought all skiffs : "Sorry, I sold you my last skiff."\par
If skiffs available : "Which of you?"\par
<NPC Name> turns to <Character Name>. "It'll cost you # gold for the deed. Interested?"\par
yes, full-"You look pretty full to me, <Character Name>."\par
yes, avatar solo, no gold-"Thou hast not enough gold."\par
yes, avatar in party, no gold-"Thy party hast not enough gold."\par
yes, avatar in party, group gold-Your party takes up a collection to purchase the vessel.\par
yes-"Excellent!" After accepting the gold, <NPC Name> hands <Character Name> the deed.\par
"Sail her straight."\par
-or- : "You'll ne'er find a better craft."\par
bye : "So long friend." He lumbers back to his work.\par
other : "That's a puzzler."\par
Lycaeum\par
\par
Mariah\par
Introduction : a freckled young lady with an enchanting smile.\par
Answered question : "Good <Time of Day>, <Gender>, can I help thee?"\par
Not answered question : "I'm sorry to put you to the trouble, but I'm only supposed to help those who know the ways of magic."\par
"So I have to ask you a question to test you..."\par
"What does the magic syllable 'Zu' mean?"\par
"What does the magic syllable 'Quas' mean?"\par
"What does the magic syllable 'Hur' mean?"\par
"What does the magic syllable 'Jux' mean?"\par
"What does the magic syllable 'Ort' mean?"\par
Wrong answer : "No, that's not it. Haven't you a Compendium of knowledge to draw on?"\par
"I'd suggest you find a Compendium to study, then come talk to me again."\par
Correct Answer : "That's right! Now then, what can I help you with?"\par
name : "They call me Mariah."\par
job : "I'm the newest member of the Council of Wizards. Somebody has to keep things running smoothly."\par
"In my spare time I use the @library to pursue my own studies."\par
coun,wiza : "They get so caught up in their work sometimes that they forget even to eat and sleep!"\par
eat,slee : "Such things matter little to them. They often dwell apart from the realm of the senses."\par
dwel,apar,real,sens : "Aye, indeed."\par
libr,stud : "'Tis the finest library in all Britannia."\par
"I study many different things, but I find learning old languages the most interesting."\par
"One can learn so much about how our own language developed!"\par
book : Don't have book : "Nystul sent word to me that thou hast a book written in a strange tongue."\par
"I'd not mind looking at it for thee..."\par
"But I'd find the task much easier if thou wouldst bring it here!"\par
Have book, no tablet : "I'd be glad to look at it for thee." She examines the book.\par
"Oh! I've seen this script before!"\par
"I have part of an ancient silver tablet in my study with writing both in our language and this."\par
"I have learned only a little from studying it, but I can make out a few words."\par
"The title is 'The Book of Prophecies,' and it says something about 'the end of our world.'"\par
"If only I had the other half of the tablet, perhaps I'd be able to decipher the rest of the book."\par
Have book, no tablet, subsequent times : "I must have both halves of the tablet before I can tell you any more."\par
"This piece I have had for quite some time, and I've learned all I can from it."\par
Have book and tablet : "With both pieces of the tablet, I should be able to work out a translation." She studies the tablet for a while, and then starts reading, haltingly, from the book.\par
An ancient prophecy tells of the final days, when the end of our world shall come. Three signs will precede the end.\par
Thrice shall a being of great evil come unto our land, and by this it shall be known that the end is nigh.\par
This evil one is of another race, who consider the evil one a great prophet.\par
Yet this false prophet follows not the principles of Control, Passion and Diligence.\par
One day the false prophet will come and desecrate our most holy shrine.\par
And the false prophet will steal our most holy artifact, the Codex of Ultimate Wisdom.\par
This shall be the first sign of the end.\par
Then, it is written, the false prophet shall descend deep into the bowels of the earth.\par
And the false prophet will cause the underworld to collapse.\par
This will cause great earthquakes to tear our world asunder, and there will be a time of plague and famine.*\par
This shall be the second sign of the end.\par
One last time shall the false prophet come.\par
This time, the false prophet will come with a band of warriors.\par
And they will destroy all that remains of the gargoyle race.\par
There is only one way that this prophecy may be averted:\par
That is by the sacrifice of the false prophet.\par
Mariah pauses for a while, deep in thought.\par
"When they refer to 'the false prophet,' they must mean you." she says.\par
"It would seem that they have reason to think you evil, from their perspective."\par
"This is a difficult matter to resolve. I think you'd better seek out more information."\par
"There's a gargoyle named Sin'Vraal living out in the desert. He speaks our language."\par
"Perhaps he could tell you more about this book, and of how the gargoyles view us."\par
half,tabl,anci,silv,deci : Do not have Hawkin's tablet : "I got my piece of the tablet from some gypsies whom I met at a pub."\par
"Mayhap they can tell thee where to look for the other piece."\par
"Bring both pieces of the tablet here and I will tell thee what I can."\par
Have Hawkin's tablet : "Ah, thou hast found the rest of the tablet! Go get the other half from my study and bring it here."\par
"With the two of them together I should be able to tell you more."\par
bye : "Fare thee well."\par
other : "I cannot help thee with that."\par
Thariand\par
Introduction : a busy looking man wearing a blue robe.\par
"So many books to keep organized, it's a wonder I have any time for my own studies..."\par
"Can I help you with something?"\par
name : "I am Thariand, of the blue star."\par
blue,star : "All the students of Nicodemus bear this sign."\par
nico : "He lives southeast of Yew."\par
yew : Somebody there should be able to give you directions."\par
job : "I'm the librarian."\par
"I prefer to spend my time studying magic, but I'll help you find some books if you keep it quick."\par
stud,magi : "Were I to master all the arcane lore contained within these volumes, I'd be the greatest sorcerer of all time!"\par
"Of course, finding all the right books is no small task..."\par
help,find,book\par
Were you interested in:\par
A. Fiction\par
B. Non-fiction\par
C. Reference\par
A:Fiction : In that category I can recommend:\par
821.34 Rzl4n\par
The Caverns of Freitag\par
Klr1734 N92 v3\par
Around the World in a Washtub\par
417.8 Baum c6\par
The Wizard of Oz\par
B:Non-Fiction : In that category I can recommend:\par
Ce 437.2 N19\par
Mating Rituals of the Northern Plains Centaur\par
027 z811f\par
Of Dreams and Visions\par
718.5 B34 z5\par
The Lost Art of Ballooning\par
Y19 T343 LP\par
Summoning Incubi for Fun and Profit\par
C:Reference : In that category I can recommend:\par
665.556 Dlz\par
Dilzal's Almanac of Good Advice\par
a001.3 bfb\par
Priliwig's Universal Compendium of Knowledge\par
998.99 ZWX\par
The Lost Book of Mantras\par
After getting book list : "Is there anything else you wanted to find?"\par
yes-Goto Top no-"Fine. You should have no trouble finding what you want once you have the call number."\par
"You do understand how our books are organized, don't you?"\par
yes-"Good. I have more important things to do than explain it to you."\par
no-"Well then, I'd suggest you look it up in The Beginner's Guide to the Dewey Decimal System."\par
"Its call number is T17 0035 r16RL.5 v43."\par
begi,guid,dewe,deci,syst : "Oh, I'm sorry, I just remembered. That book was checked out last week. Try coming back for it later."\par
shri : "We have a book that tells the history of the shrines. If only I could remember the title..."\par
bye : "Remember, any books you take out of here are due back before the next bipolar lunar conjunction!"\par
other : You could probably find more information on that topic in Priliwig's Universial Compendium of Knowledge."\par
Minoc\par
\par
Isabella\par
Introduction : a woman of elegant demeanor, wearing a finely embroidered dress.\par
Initial visit : "Good <Time of Day>, Avatar. I'm glad thy travels have brought thee here again."\par
Subsequent visits : "Ah, <Gender> <Avatar Name>, the famous Avatar!"\par
"I have heard much of thy exploits, but never expected to meet you in person."\par
"'Tis indeed an honor."\par
name : "I am Lady Isabella. Thy name, of course, is well known throughout the land."\par
well,know,thro,land : "The tales of thy exploits are known by even the smallest of children."\par
"I recognized thee from the portrait Woodroffe made the last time thou came to our land."\par
wood,pain,port : "One of the finest artisans that ever dwelt in Minoc."\par
"Alas, he died of the flu two years ago."\par
die,flu : "Aye, a pity, that."\par
job : "'Tis my privilege to be mayor of Minoc, the city of sacrifice."\par
"We are renowned for our fine craftsmen."\par
city,mino,reno,craf : "The artisan's guild is located here."\par
sacr : "We were entrusted with the Rune of Sacrifice."\par
rune : "I gave it to Selganor, the artisan's guildmaster."\par
arti,guil : "When the Rune of Sacrifice was sent to our city, I entrusted it to their care."\par
selg : "He's a fine musician. He lives just across the road from me, in the guild hall."\par
musi : "If I weren't so busy, I'd take lessons from him myself."\par
busy,less : "Aye, this is a big city."\par
mant : "The good healer Tara should be able to tell you the mantra."\par
"Go ask at her house, on the north side of town."\par
heal,tara : "Tara is a very compassionate woman."\par
garg : "I've heard rumors of such creatures, but I know no one who has actually seen one."\par
ball,fly,airs,ligh\par
"The balloonist flew off on an important mission, and never returned."\par
"Selganor should be able to tell you more about it."\par
"Tell me, is it true you once rode in a balloon whilst on the quest of the Avatar?"\par
no-"Ah, well..."\par
"Some tales are but empty words, with less substance than the breath that carries them."\par
yes-"It must have been wonderful, to drift amongst the very clouds..."\par
impo,miss : "Yes, ask Selganor."\par
bye : "Farewell, and please honor us with your presence again soon."\par
other : "I cannot help thee with that."\'b0+\'ee\'b0+"Ah, thou wouldst be interested to hear of that."\par
Selganor\par
Introduction : a slender, graceful man tuning a lute.\par
Initial visit : "Oh, hello. Maybe you can help me with something."\par
"My nephew is studying alchemy, and he needs to know this."\par
Subsequent visits : "Hello. There's something I need to ask you, what was it..."\par
"Oh, yes, now I remember!"\par
Questions : "What kind of fork should mandrake roots be prepared with?"\par
"What part of the nightshade mushroom is used in spellcasting?"\par
"Where does sulfurous ash come from?"\par
"What are black pearls used for?"\par
Incorrect answer : "No, that doesn't sound right. If only I had a Compendium to look it up in..."\par
Correct answer : "Thanks! Now what can I do for you?"\par
bye : "Hmmmm... I wish I knew the answer to that question..."\par
He turns away from you absent-mindedly.\par
If answer quetion : "Hail and welcome, <Avatar Name>!"\par
name : "My name is Selganor. 'Tis a name with a long history..."\par
"But you have the look of one with more important business."\par
selg,hist : "It means 'seeker of the crystal'. Perhaps I'll tell you more some other time."\par
seek,crys : "That's quite a tale."\par
tale : "Indeed."\par
impo,busi : "Perhaps you're interested in joining the guild."\par
job : "I am the guildmaster of artisans."\par
rune : Have rune : "I already loaned you the rune."\par
Don't have rune : "I'd be glad to loan you the rune, but only members of the guild are allowed to handle it."\par
loan,memb,guil,arti,join : Already member : "Wait a minute... You're already a member of the guild!"\par
Not a member : "If you want to join the guild, you need to do two things."\par
"First, you need to make a set of panpipes. Julia can teach you how to that."\par
"You also need to commit 'Stones' to memory. 'Tis a simple tune - ask Gwenno to play it for thee."\par
pan,pipe,ston : If joined guild : "You should play your panpipes often - 'twill lighten your step on the long road ahead."\par
If not joined guild : "Have you made a set of panpipes?"\par
no-"Oh. Well, Julia can show you how if you need help."\par
yes, no pipes-"But I don't see any!"\par
yes, have pipes-He inspects the pipes. "Very good, very good indeed."\par
"Now tell me the sequence of notes in 'Stones' and I'll induct you into the guild."\par
"Numeric notation will be fine."\par
678987,8767653 : "Excellent!" He strums a chord on his lute, then taps you lightly once on each shoulder with it.\par
"You are now a full member of the guild of artisans."\par
He reaches into a belt-pouch, takes out the Rune of Sacrifice, and hands it to you.\par
"I'm sure you'll be needing this in your travels."\par
"I know you'll find some solution to this gargoyle problem."\par
other : "No, I'm afraid that's not it. Gwenno can help you learn the notes."\par
juli : If Julia in party : "Yes, ask her about it."\par
Don't have panpipes : "She made my lute - and most of our other instruments as well."\par
"She lives just across the road, next door to Lady Isabella."\par
isab : "She's the mayor."\par
gwen : "I know she's around here somewhere..."\par
If Gwenno in party : "I'm right here, Selganor!"\par
"Ah, I knew you'd be somewhere close by."\par
lute,inst : "I prefer stringed instruments. They make such lovely sounds."\par
ball : "Oh, are you looking for the man who invented the balloon?" He stares upward, stroking his chin pensively.\par
"Ah yes, now I remember. He flew to Sutek's castle."\par
"Said something about a big job he had to do there."\par
sute,cast,flew : "Sutek lives on an island, far to the south."\par
isla : "It's east of Serpent's Hold."\par
bye : "It was nice talking to you."\par
other : "I don't think I can help you there."\par
Tara\par
Introduction : a kindly old woman.\par
Initial visit : "Welcome to my place of healing, Avatar."\par
"I hope thou needest not my services!"\par
Subsequent visits : "Welcome again, noble Avatar."\par
"I hope this visit is for pleasure, not business!"\par
heal : If healthy, solo : "But thou art well!"\par
If healthy, party : "But all of you are well!"\par
Injured : "Which of you?"\par
"I see thy injury, <Character Name>."\par
"Wilt thou make an offering of 30 gold?"\par
yes-Tara approaches <Character Name> and binds the wounds.\par
no-"If thou wilt not pay, I cannot heal thee."\par
yes, no gold, low karma-"I'm sorry. Without an offering I cannot heal thee."\par
yes, no gold, high karma-"Thou art poor, but thy cause is just."\par
"I will heal thee without payment."\par
Sasha approaches <Character Name> and binds the wounds.\par
"Is there aught else I can do for thee?"\par
cure : If healthy, solo : "But thou art well!"\par
If healthy, party : "But all of you are well!"\par
Poisoned : "Which of you?"\par
"I see thy injury, <Character Name>."\par
"Wilt thou make an offering of 10 gold?"\par
yes-Tara grabs a vial and pours it down <Character Name>'s throat.\par
<Character Name> feels much better.\par
no-"If thou wilt not pay, I cannot heal thee."\par
yes, no gold, low karma-"I'm sorry. Without an offering I cannot heal thee."\par
yes, no gold, high karma-"Thou art poor, but thy cause is just."\par
"I will heal thee without payment."\par
Tara grabs a vial and pours it down <Character Name>'s throat.\par
<Character Name> feels much better.\par
resu : Party alive : "But gladly can I say that none of your party is dead!"\par
Party member dead : "Oh! I see that <Character Name> carries a fallen comrade!"\par
"Wilt thou make an offering of 400 gold?"\par
no-"Then there is naught I can do save grieve with thee."\par
yes, no gold-"That isn't enough money."\par
"Thou art # gold piece(s) short."\par
yes-Your party takes up a collection for their fallen comrade.\par
Tara lays hands upon the corpse...\par
"Doman..."\par
"thixus..."\par
"anretu!\par
And the dead live again!\par
If have another corpse : "I see that <Character Name> carries another slain friend."\par
name : "My name is Tara."\par
job : "I'm the healer for this town."\par
"I've cared for the unfit here for threescore years!"\par
unfi : "Those who need healing, curing, or to be resurrected."\par
mant,sacr : "'Cah,' that is the word of sacrifice."\par
bye,no : "Farewell!"\par
yes : "What can I do for thee?"\par
other : "I don't understand <Last Input>."\par
-or- : "I beg thy pardon?"\par
Gwenno\par
Introduction : a plainly dressed bard.\par
In party : "Is there something you needed to know?"\par
Not in party : "Hello, <Avatar Name>."\par
name : "It's me, Gwenno. You have been away from our realm a long time, haven't you..."\par
job : "Iolo's apprentice has taken over my job at Iolo's Bows."\par
"These days I've been transcribing the folk songs of Britannia into numerical notation for the artisan's guild."\par
In party : "Of course, helping you on your quest is more important than that right now."\par
Not in party : "Of course, if you need my help, I could leave the guild for a time and join you."\par
arti,guil : "Selganor can tell you more about the guild than I could."\par
selg : "He's the guildmaster."\par
join,help,ques : In party : "I have joined you already!"\par
Not in party : "Do you want me to come with you?"\par
no-"Okay. Let me know if you need my help later."\par
yes-"Okay! It will be nice to spend some time on the road again."\par
She runs over and hooks arms with Iolo, and they dance around and around.\par
They're obviously very happy to see each other again.\par
In boat : "Not while you're in that thing!"\par
Party full : "You have enough travelling with you already."\par
"If you ask one of them to leave first, I'd be happy to join you."\par
leav : Not in party : "I'd have to join you before I could leave, silly!"\par
In boat : "Let's get our feet back on solid ground first, okay?"\par
In party : "All right. I'll head back home to Minoc. Come let me know if you need me to join you again later."\par
"I'll leave all my things here - some of them might come in handy for you."\par
She gives Iolo a big hug before she leaves.\par
"Remember to keep your socks dry," she says, "and I'll see you when the quest is done."\par
folk,song : "The songs of a people are an important part of their heritage."\par
"Putting them down on paper helps preserve our @traditions for future generations."\par
heri,pape,trad,futu,gene : "I'm so glad you appreciate the value of tradition."\par
iolo : "A bit scruffy, but he's the sweetest husband I could ever ask for."\par
If Iolo in party : Iolo says "You're only saying that because it's true." He gives her a kiss.\par
appr,bow : "If you need a good crossbow, the shop is in Britain, over by the Blue Boar."\par
blue,boar : "It's a lively place."\par
nume,nota,tran : "A number for every note, and a note for every number."\par
note : "Each note is represented by one number."\par
numb : "Each number represents one note."\par
repr : "I knew you'd catch on!"\par
play,tune : "Oh, Selganor sent you, did he? I bet you want to learn 'Stones.'"\par
lear,ston : "In the standard numerical notation, it reads '678987 8767653'."\par
bye : "Nice talking with you."\par
other : "Sorry, can't help you there."\par
Julia\par
Introduction : a sturdy woman with calloused hands and a loud manner.\par
In party : "Aye, and wha' can ye be askin' of me?"\par
"Sure an' I don't think I can be helpin' ya with this!"\par
If told to leave : "Aye, so the great Avatar deigns to return, does he?"\par
"Well, what does her lady/his lord ship want now?"\par
Initial visit : "Well, then the rumors are true!"\par
"'Tis well and good that ye have returned to our land, Avatar!"\par
Subsequent visits : "Well met, Avatar. \'a7An' what can I be doin' for ye this <Time of Day>?"\par
name : Subsequent times : "Sure and you're goin' daft, <Gender>."\par
"I be named Julia, same as the last time we met!"\par
Initial time : "Named Julia I am, <Gender>, and pleased to meet ye."\par
job : "Instruments I make, the finest in the land."\par
In party : "For now, though, I'm followin' ye, and glad to do it!"\par
Not in party : "Not to be immodest, but I'm respected by all the Guild!"\par
"Ach, but give it all up I would for a life of adventure like your own..."\par
guil : "If ye would like to be a member too, go talk to Selganor."\par
selg : "He's the guildmaster."\par
pan,pipe : "Sent you to me they did? Aye, I can believe that."\par
"Now the panpipes are a tricky instrument."\par
"You gotta have the finest wood."\par
"If you want to learn how to make pipes, you'll need to bring a yew board."\par
"But it must be freshly cut!"\par
yew,boar : "Do ye have a fine yew board for me this <Time of Day>?"\par
yes, no board-"Well where is it? I canna see any board on ye!"\par
yes-"Ach, aye, and good wood it is, too. A fine set of pipes this will make!"\par
Julia sets the wood down on a bench and starts carving.\par
As you watch, the rough board slowly turns into smooth wood rods.\par
Then she hollows out each rod and pegs them all together.\par
Lastly, she notches each tube and cuts them all to the proper lengths.\par
"An' there it is, <Gender>, a set of panpipes fit for any bard in the land!"\par
She hands you the finished pipes.\par
no-"No? What are ye, daft? I canna be makin' pipes without wood!"\par
fres,cut : "Go to Yew where they grow the best wood in Britannia."\par
"Buy a freshly-cut yew log and take it to a sawmill."\par
"Have 'em cut it into a board, and bring it back here."\par
"Then I'll show ye how panpipes are made!"\par
life,adve : "Aye, I'd join you if ye wish."\par
join : "Join ye? Me?"\par
If told to leave : "Aye, and be dumped off in the middle of nowhere again?"\par
"Not likely! Find some other sap to do your bidding!"\par
First time : "Aye, gladly! Let's be on our way."\par
Party full : "Ach, I can tell that you say that to everyone ye meet."\par
"Ask me again when you haven't as many companions."\par
In party : "What are ye, daft? If I join ye, where are we gonna go?"\par
In boat : "Nay, <Gender>. Ask me when we're ashore."\'b0\par
In party : "I'm already in your band!"\par
"Though now I'm not so sure I want to be led by a crazy person..."\par
leav Not in psrty : "Leave! Nay, 'tis my house. You do the leavin'!"\par
In boat : "Leave?! And jump overboard?!"\par
"Ach, I get it. You're makin' a wee joke!"\par
In party : "What? Oh, I suppose a craftsman isn't warrior enough to suit her lady/his lord ship's tastes!"\par
"Well, that's fine and dandy with me!"\par
"A good <Time of Day> and a good bye to the lot of ye!"\par
"I'm tired of carrying all this junk anyway!"\par
bye : In party : "Aye, enough chatting. On with our quest!"\par
Not in party : "May fortune follow ye on thy way!"\par
If told to leave : "Ach, aye! I wouldna want to hinder her lady/his lord ship's journey!"\par
other : In party : "Are ye daft? Why would I know anything about <Last Input>?"\par
Not in party' : "Nay, <Gender>, I know nothing about <Last Input>."\par
Michelle\par
Introduction : an industrious young woman.\par
Subsequent visits : "Well, hello again, Avatar!"\par
Initial visit : "How can I help thee this fine <Time of Day>?"\par
name : "I'm Michelle."\par
"Thou needn't tell me thy name, <Avatar Name>. The Avatar is famous throughout the land!"\par
job : "I weave baskets and beehives, just like my father and his father before him."\par
"My baskets are sold throughout Britannia!" she adds proudly.\par
buy, bask, bee : Shop closed : "Come to my shop when I'm open!"\par
Shop open : "Wouldst thou like to buy one of my weavings?"\par
no-"All right, though I can give thou the best price in the land!"\par
yes-"Which of you?"\par
Custom, no plans-"I fear my schedule is packed."\par
"I have no time to create a basket for which I have no plans."\par
Custom, have plans Can't carry-"But it would weigh six stones!"\par
"Thou couldst not carry such a basket, loaded as thou art."\par
"Lighten thy load, and then I will weave thee this basket."\par
Can carry : "Such a basket would cost 300 gold, in advance. Art thou still interested?"\par
no-"I do not blame thee. 'Tis a huge undertaking!"\par
yes, no gold-"Thou hast not enough money for the basket."\par
"I fear I cannot afford to start such a task on a mere # gold crown(s)."\par
yes-Your party takes up a collection to pay for the basket.\par
She begins weaving the huge basket, chatting with you as she works.\par
"Hast thou found a silk weaver yet?"\par
yes-"Thou art wise, then. 'Tis a huge bag this will require."\par
no : "Well, I can see that this will require a huge silk bag."\par
"I know not where thou might find a silk weaver to craft it!"\'b0\par
She continues weaving the basket.\par
"I do not mean to pry, but why dost thou need a balloon anyway?"\par
"I'm afraid I don't understand."\par
-or- : "Oh, I see."\par
She continues weaving the basket.\par
Time passes...\par
More time passes...\par
"Finished!"\par
"It took less time than I had thought it might!"\par
She gives the basket to <Character Name>, who struggles under its weight.\par
Buying basket/beehive : "How many dost thou wish?"\par
"Those <Item Name> cost #1 gold apiece."\par
"How many dost thou wish?"\par
Too heavy for all : "Thou canst not carry that many!"\par
"I will sell thee just # <Item Name>(s)."\par
Too heavy for any : "But thou canst not carry any <Item Name>(s)!"\par
Not enough gold for all : "Thou hast not enough gold for that many!"\par
"I will sell thee just # <Item Name>(s)."\par
Not enough gold for any : "But thou canst not afford any <Item Name>s!"\par
Purchased : Michelle takes <Character Name>'s money and hands over the <Item Name>(s>.\par
"I appreciate thy business."\par
"Is there aught else thou wouldst buy?"\par
no-"Perhaps some other time."\par
yes-"Enjoy thy <Item Name>"\par
"These baskets are sturdy and decorative."\par
"Thou'lt find no better in all Britannia for the price, a mere # gold."\par
"If thou hast need of beehives, these woven ones are the best thou'lt find!"*\par
"And cheap, too, at # apiece."\par
sell : "I have all I need, and have no reason to purchase anything more."\par
"But I appreciate thy offer."\par
fath,ball : "Father once told me a story of weaving a basket large enough for eight people!"\par
"He never showed me the plans, though."\par
plan : Shop closed : "Ask when I'm open for business!"\par
Shop open : No plans : "Yes, without accurate plans it takes far too much time to craft a basket."\par
Have plans : "Then it was true! Father did weave a basket that big!"\par
"Surely I could do the same."\par
She studies the plans for a moment.\par
bye : "Farewell! I hope I've aided thy quest!"\par
other : "Beg pardon?"\par
Aaron\par
Introduction : a plump blond man with curly blond hair and a cheerful face.\par
Subsequent visits : "Hello again, Avatar!"\par
Initial visit : "Hello hello!"\par
"What can I do for you this <Time of Day>?"\par
name : Subsequent times : "That's funny. I remember your name!"\par
Initial time : "My name's Aaron."\par
job : "I run the sawmill! Is there anything I can do for thee?"\par
saw : "Yes, I saw logs into boards."\par
boar,log : Shop closed : "Come to my shop when I'm open!"\par
Shop open : "My mill makes smooth boards and planks out of rough-cut logs."\par
If have log : "Aye, I see <Character Name> has a yew log." He inspects the wood with a practiced eye.\par
"Good grain. Yes, I can make a fine board out of this log."\par
"But it will cost thee 5 gold, <Character Name>!"\par
"Still interested?"\par
yes, no gold-"Sorry, but I can't work for free!"\par
"Come back when you have the 5 gold!"\par
yes-Aaron goes to his saw and turns the log into a flat, sanded board.\par
"There!" He hands <Character Name> the finished product.\par
no-"Oh. Well, perhaps some other time then."\par
bye : "Farewell!"\par
other : "Beg pardon?"\par
Dale\par
Introduction : a short, barrel-chested man.\par
"A good <Time of Day> to thee, Avatar."\par
"Anything else can I do for thee?"\par
name : "I am Dale the Glassblower."\par
job : "I make glassware, the finest in the land!"\par
glas : "If you'd like to buy some of my glassware, just say the word!"\par
swor : "Aye, I know how to make glass swords."\par
"But there is little demand for them."\par
dema : "I require five gems for the crafting. This is too expensive for most."\par
"Aye, but things of beauty they are..."\par
beau : "Thou seemst like a person who appreciates art."\par
"I'll make thee one, if thou hast the gems."\par
crys,lens,tele : "Hmmm...You'd have to see a lensmaker about that."\par
"I hear there's one near the Lycaeum."\par
buy : Shop closed : "Come to my shop when it's open!"\par
Shop open : "Which of you?"\par
"Which item?"\par
"Interested, <Character Name>?"\par
yes, but full-"But 'twould make thee o'erburdened, <Character Name>!"\par
yes-"Excellent!"\par
After accepting <Character Name>'s gold, <NPC Name> hands over the <Item Name>.\par
yes, no gold-"But thou hast not enough gold, <Character Name>!"\par
no-\par
gems : Shop closed : "Come to my shop when it's open!"\par
Shop open : No gems : "Aye, a glass sword needs fine gems to complete its beauty!"\par
Less than 5 gems : "Sorry, <Character Name>, you haven't enough gems."\par
5 or mroe gems : "Aye, <Character Name>, I see the gems you carry."\par
"Dost thou wish me to craft thee a glass sword?"\par
no-"Hmm," he scowls, "perhaps I was mistaken about thee..."\par
yes-"It will cost thee 5 gems! Art thou certain?"\par
yes, full-"But thou cannot carry such a sword!"\par
yes-<NPC Name> turns to the furnace and begins crafting the sword.\par
Soon it is finished, and you marvel at its beauty!\par
"There she is, and a finer work thou'lt never see!"\par
no-"Hmm," he scowls, "perhaps I was mistaken about thee..."\par
bye : A fine <Time of Day> to thee!"\par
other : "Sorry?"\par
James\par
Introduction : a young lad.\par
"A good <Time of Day> to you, <Gender>."\par
Subsequent visits : "Is there more I can do for thee?"\par
Initial visit : "What can I do for thee?"\par
buy : "Be more specific, <Gender>."\par
"Me master 'as quite a large inventory."\par
"Dost thou want arms or armor?"\par
arms : Shop closed : "Come to me shop when it's open!"\par
Shop open : "Which of you?"\par
"Which item?"\par
"That <Item Name> costs # gold."\par
"Interested, <Character Name>?"\par
yes, but full-"But 'twould make thee o'erburdened, <Character Name>!"\par
yes-"Excellent!"\par
After accepting <Character Name>'s gold, <NPC Name> hands over the <Item Name>.\par
yes, no gold-"But thou hast not enough gold, <Character Name>!"\par
no-"What else can I do for thee?"\par
armo : Shop closed : "Come to me shop when it's open!"\par
Shop open : "Which of you?"\par
"Which item?"\par
"That <Item Name> costs # gold."\par
"Interested, <Character Name>?"\par
yes, but full-"But 'twould make thee o'erburdened, <Character Name>!"\par
yes-"Excellent!"\par
After accepting <Character Name>'s gold, <NPC Name> hands over the <Item Name>.\par
yes, no gold-"But thou hast not enough gold, <Character Name>!"\par
no-"What else can I do for thee?"\par
sell : Shop closed : "Come to me shop when it's open!"\par
Shop open : No items for sale : "Sorry, none of you has anything I need."\par
Items for sale : "Aye, <Character Name> has something of interest..."\par
Multiple characters : "Which of you?"\par
"Which item?"\par
"Will you take # gold for that <Item Name>, <Character Name>?"\par
no, if Avatar selling-"Perhaps some other time, then."\par
no. if party member selling-"Perhaps something else then?"\par
yes-"Done!" <NPC Name> hands <Character Name> # gold pieces and takes the <Item Name>.\par
"What else can I do for thee?"\par
job : "I'm just the apprentice, but if you want to buy or sell somethin' I can help ya."\par
appr : "Me master went off to fight the gargoyles."\par
"'E ain't been 'eard from since."\par
"I'm just mindin' the place 'til 'e gets back."\par
name : "Me name's James, <Gender>."\par
bye : "Good <Time of Day> to ya, and I 'ope ye come back soon!"\par
other : "Beg pardon, <Gender>?"\par
Trebor\par
Introduction : a tall, muscled man with a wide grin.\par
Subsequent visits : He squints at you. "We've met, haven't we?"\par
Initial visit : "Hello," he says, lumbering over to you and extending a large hand.\par
"What can I do for ya?"\par
name : "Trebor."\par
buy, job : If bought all vessels : "You bought my last craft!"\par
If vessels remain : "I sell ships and skiffs."\par
If only ships remain : "I sell ships : If only skiffs remain : "I sell skiffs :\par
ship' : If bought all ships : "Sorry, I sold you my last ship."\par
If ships available : "Which of you?"\par
<NPC Name> turns to <Character Name>. "It'll cost you # gold for the deed. Interested?"\par
yes, full-"You look pretty full to me, <Character Name>."\par
yes, avatar solo, no gold-"Thou hast not enough gold."\par
yes, avatar in party, no gold-"Thy party hast not enough gold."\par
yes, avatar in party, group gold-Your party takes up a collection to purchase the vessel.\par
yes-"Excellent!" After accepting the gold, <NPC Name> hands <Character Name> the deed.\par
"Sail her straight."\par
-or- : "You'll ne'er find a better craft."\par
skif : If bought all skiffs : "Sorry, I sold you my last skiff."\par
If skiffs available : "Which of you?"\par
<NPC Name> turns to <Character Name>. "It'll cost you # gold for the deed. Interested?"\par
yes, full-"You look pretty full to me, <Character Name>."\par
yes, avatar solo, no gold-"Thou hast not enough gold."\par
yes, avatar in party, no gold-"Thy party hast not enough gold."\par
yes, avatar in party, group gold-Your party takes up a collection to purchase the vessel.\par
yes-"Excellent!" After accepting the gold, <NPC Name> hands <Character Name> the deed.\par
"Sail her straight."\par
-or- : "You'll ne'er find a better craft."\par
job : If bought all vessels : "I used to sell ships and skiffs."\par
"But you bought them all!"\'b0\par
If vessels remain : "I sell ships and skiffs."\par
If only ships remain : "I sell ships : If only skiffs remain : "I sell skiffs :\par
bye : "So long friend."\par
He lumbers back to his work.\par
other : "That's a puzzler."\par
Troy\par
Introduction : a spidery looking man with delicate hands.\par
"Hello."\par
name : "My name is Troy."\par
job : "I make clocks. The movements of the various\par
parts are very complex and interconnected."\par
"Like the @moons and stars, or the pieces on a chess board."\par
cloc,move,part,compl,inte : "The ticking of clocks is the pulse of civilization."\par
puls,civi : "Without clocks, people would just sit around uselessly, with no idea what to do next!"\par
tick,soun : "Of course, the ticks would be useless without the tocks."\par
tock : "They're much deeper sounding and more satisfying than ticks."\par
moon,star : "Ephemerides is going to build a model of the whole system."\par
"I helped him design the gearwork that makes it go."\par
mode,syst,desi,gear : "I know all about gears."\par
ephe : "He lives at the Lycaeum."\par
lyca : "It's a great center of learning."\par
lear : "If you didn't run around asking foolish questions all the time, you might learn something yourself!"\par
piec,ches,boar : "I like to play chess. Keeps ones mind fit."\par
mind : "Some people don't use theirs - but I do."\par
bye : "Until we come into conjunction again."\par
other : "The sound of the clocks is so soothing... Excuse me, did you say something?"\par
Doris\par
Introduction : a stunningly beautiful young woman.\par
The woman never looks up from the book she's reading, even when you speak to her.\par
Initial visit : "Yes, what do you want?"\par
Subsequent visits : "Yes, what do you want now?"\par
name : "My name's Doris, but you can just call me 'Hey you.'"\par
"Everyone else does."\par
hey,you : "Typical," she mutters.\par
job : "I'm in charge of the Tinker's Inn while my father's away."\par
"If you have any complaint, no matter how trivial, please feel free to bother me."\par
It doesn't really sound like she means what she said.\par
rest,inn,room : "Room and board's 5 gold per night per person, cash in advance."\par
"Interested?"\par
no-"What a pity."\par
yes-Your party takes up a collection to pay for the rooms.\par
Putting all thoughts of the rude innkeeper out of your mind, you drift off into a pleasant sleep.\par
The next morning, Doris sullenly serves you breakfast and then returns to her studies.\par
yes, no gold-"No pay, no stay. 5 gold, cash in advance."\par
beau : "Yes, that's what they all say."\par
fath : "My father called me back from the Lycaeum so that he could go fight the gargoyles."\par
book,read,lyca : "Yes, I'm learning the mystic arts from the great Xiao."\par
"Though I doubt you'd know much about that sort of thing."\par
xiao : "She is the wisest mage in all Britannia."\par
"Only she can teach the spells of the greatest power."\par
wise,mage,brit,powe,spel,grea : "Mmm-hmm, that's right."\par
bye : "Mmm-hmmm," she mutters as you leave.\par
other : "Oh really?"\par
-or- : "Hmm, fascinating," she yawns.\par
Moonglow\par
\par
Ephemerides\par
Introduction : a solemn man, constantly dusting and polishing the items in his shop.\par
At night : The old man never turns away from his telescope. "Shhh! Can't you see I'm busy?!"\par
"Whoever you are, come back in the morning."\par
The old man adjusts the telescope, exclaims "Aha!" and starts scribbling on a scroll.\par
During day : "Ahem. Yes, what can I help you with, madam/sir?"\par
name : "I am Ephemerides."\par
job : "I am an astronomer. More precisely, I calculate movements of the stars, phases of the moons..."\par
"My field of specialization is tidal predictions."\par
"I also make various glasswares and instruments."\par
inst : "Yes, sextants mostly."\par
glas : "Lenses and the like."\par
buy,sex : "Which of you?"\par
full-<NPC Name> looks at <Character Name>. "You haven't any room in your pack."\par
no gold-<NPC Name> looks at <Character Name>. "<Item Name>s cost more gold than you have."\par
Have gold/room-<NPC Name> looks at <Character Name>. "It'll cost you # gold for a <Item Name>. Do you want one?"\par
no-<NPC Name> frowns at <Character Name>, "That was a good price."\par
yes-He hands <Character Name> a <Item Name>.\par
tida,pred,fiel : "Lord British has requested the publication of an almanac for use by the general populace."\par
"It will contain high tides, low tides, ebb tides, flood tides, spring tides, and neap tides."\par
tide : "Britannia's tides are a function of the two moons, Felucca and Trammel, interacting with our world, Sosaria."\par
sosa,felu,tram,moon,sosa : "I plan to publish a paper about how the world is flat, to dispel all this foolish talk to the contrary."\par
"Afterwards, I will construct a model of how it all works: an orrery."\par
orre : leased with your interest, Ephemerides shows you papers with plans for a clockwork model of the Sosarian system.\par
"This, ahem, flat piece is Britannia. Each moon would exert a pull on the oceans thus, resulting in the tides."\par
"You turn that little handle there to get it to go!"*\par
The normally staid Ephemerides is practically giggling with glee.\par
roun : "Absurd!"\par
neap : "Low and high tide marks are close together. The planets are in quadrature."\par
quad : "Angular separation of two celestial bodies (as measured from a third) being ninety degrees, of course. A very safe tide."\par
spri : "The opposite of a neap tide; the sun, earth and moons are all aligned."\par
"Thus, lines of low and high tide are far apart."\par
"Once I construct my orrery, I'd be able to demonstrate the principles involved."\par
vort,lens,conc : Made lens : "I hope the lens I made you will prove suitable."\par
Don't have Gargoyle lens : "What sort of lens do you want?"\par
Ephimerdes has Gargoyle lens : "When you bring me a glass sword, I should be able to duplicate your lens for you."\par
Avatar has Gargoyle lens : "Ooooh, let me see it... That's a very interesting lens."\par
"You need a concave copy of it? Let me think..."\par
"It would be very tricky to duplicate, being magical in nature, but I believe I might be able to do it."\par
"The material and the nature of the enchantment appear similar to those involved in the making of glass swords."\par
"If I could keep this to analyze while you go get me a glass sword, I'll try and make a copy for you."\par
Before you can protest, he pockets the lens. "Let me know when you have the glass sword."\par
Avatar has sword, Epimerdes has lens : "Ah, you've brought me a glass sword! Let me just get your lens..."\par
He fumbles through his pockets.\par
"Oh no! I seem to have lost the lens!"\par
"Just kidding... Here it is. Now I'll melt down the glass sword and try to cast a lens for you."\par
You watch as he works, intently focused on his task. Finally he pronounces the job a success.\par
"Here's your lens back, and the duplicate. There's no charge - the challenge of the task was reward enough."\par
"I don't know what you need these lenses for, but I wish you luck!"\par
swor : "I once heard of a master glassblower who could make glass swords..."\par
mast : "Minoc is the logical place to look. That town is filled with master craftsmen."\par
"Why, I once heard of a man from Minoc who built a flying machine!"\par
fly,mach : "Must have been a fairy tale, of course."\par
bye : "Goodbye, <Gender>. It was nice talking with you."\par
other : "That I cannot help you with."\par
Xiao\par
Introduction : a wise, scholarly woman. "Good <Time of Day>, Avatar. For what purpose hast thou come?"\par
buy,reag : If shop closed : "My shop is closed right now."\par
Shop open : "Which of you?"\par
"Which of these?"\par
<Reagent Name> costs # per portion."\par
"How many dost thou want?"\par
Xiao hands <Character Name> the <Item Name>.\par
Inventory sort of full : "Thou cannot carry that much!"\par
"I'll give thee #; thou dost not need the rest."\par
Inventory full : "Thou cannot carry any <Item Name>!"\par
Short on gold : "Thou cannot afford that much!"\par
"I'll give thee #; thou cannot have the rest."\par
No gold : "Thou cannot afford any <Item Name>!"\par
lear,spel : Buying spell without spellbook : "But thou hast not a spellbook!"\par
Buying spell and no group member has spellbook : "But none of you has a spellbook!"\par
If have spellbook : "Which of you?"\par
"In which Circle does <Character Name> wish to study?"\par
If don't answer 1 - 8 : "As everybody knows, there are only eight circles."\par
If no spell in that circle : "I have no spells of that circle."\par
If character can't cast spell level : "I sense that <Character Name> is only ready for the # Circle."\par
"But such matters are not my concern..."\par
"Perhaps <Character Name> is not ready for this circle."\par
If character not ready for the 8th Circle : "Thou are not yet ready for such knowledge."\par
"Seek out and speak with the wisps, and learn their secrets."\par
"Then wilt thou will be prepared to enter the Eighth Circle."\par
"That spell costs # gold. Interested?"\par
yes-Rudyom hands <Character Name> a piece of rune-covered parchment.\par
yes, no gold-<Character Name> lacks the # gold required."\par
book : If not in shop : "My shop is closed right now."\par
If shop open : "Which of you?"\par
If inventory full : "But thou cannot carry a spellbook!"\par
Buying spellbook : "A spellbook costs 60 gold pieces. Interested?"\par
no-"Perhaps one of thy friends then."\par
ye, no gold-"But thou cannot afford a spellbook!"\par
name : "I am Xiao."\par
job : "I serve on the Council of Wizards."\par
"I also teach spells and sell magical reagents."\par
secr,wisp : "Their secret is far more powerful than anything I might teach thee."\par
powe : "Truly, it would be terrible if the wrong person were to learn it."\par
"Only we of the Council of Wizards know the secret."\par
"But, since thou art the Avatar, surely it is safe for thee to learn it as well."\par
avat : "Your example inspires us all."\par
serv,coun,wiza : "'Tis our task to keep the forces of magic in balance throughout the land."\par
"We also do what we can to promote the eight virtues."\par
prom,virt : "We created the shrines, many years ago."\par
shri : "Thariand can tell thee more."\par
thar : "He is the librarian at the Lycaeum."\par
libr,lyca : "Surely you know where the Lycaeum is."\par
forc,magi,bala : "Not an easy task."\par
bye : "Thou art always welcome here, Avatar."\par
other : "Perhaps you should speak of that to another."\par
Dargoth\par
Introduction : a stern, severe man in white robes.\par
You interrupt the man from his research.\par
"Yes, yes, what is it?"\par
"You've come for healing, I suppose."\par
heal : Uninjured : "I can do nothing for those scars. Still, they look healed."\par
"Why do you waste my time? None of you are wounded!"\par
Injured : "Which of you?"\par
Avatar : "<Character Name>, your injury is most interesting!"\par
Non-Avatar : "Ah! <Character Name>, you have an injury worthy of my skill!"\par
"It will cost you 30 gold for me to heal you, interested?"\par
yes-Laying hands upon <Character Name>, Dargoth mends the wounds.\par
"What else do you need?"\par
no-"I need to be paid to heal you."\par
cure : Not poisoned : "You don't look good, but you're not poisoned."\par
"Why do you waste my time? None of you are poisoned!"\par
Poisoned : "Which of you?"\par
Avatar : "Fascinating, <Character Name>! I have read about such poison only in ancient books!"\par
Non-Avatar : "I haven't gotten many cases like this since they invented swamp boots."\par
"It'll cost 10 gold to cure you, interested?"\par
yes-Laying hands upon <Character Name>, Dargoth removes the poison.\par
yes, no gold-If you can't pay, I can't cure you."\par
no-"Oh."\par
resu : No characters dead : He raises an eyebrow.\par
"You may not be my choice for dinner conversation, but none of you are dead."\par
Character dead : Seeing the dead body that <Character Name> carries, he becomes more polite.\par
"I am sorry you've lost a compatriot."\par
"For 400 gold I can attempt resurrection, interested?"\par
no-"Resurrection is a difficult task. I'm sorry, but I need to be paid."\par
yes, no gold-"That ain't enough money."\par
"You are # gold piece(s) short."\par
"Go see a gravedigger. I'll reckon his price'll be lower."\par
yes, have gold-Your party takes up a collection for their fallen comrade\par
Dargoth lays hands upon the corpse...\par
"Doman..."\par
"thixus..."\par
"anretu!"\par
And the dead live again!\par
If have another corpse : "I see that <Character Name> carries another slain friend."\par
name : "I am Dargoth, master of medical lore."\par
job : "My true calling is research."\par
"My studies here have advanced the healing art throughout the world!"\par
"But, more often than not, I am called upon to cure poison ivy and heal paper cuts!"\par
"I grow weary of such trifles!"\par
bye,no : "Stay out of trouble!"\par
"I don't want to see my fine workmanship wasted!"\par
yes : "Well, what can I do for thee?"\par
other : "Come, come, get to the point. I'm a busy man!"\par
Rob Frasier\par
Introduction : a short, congenial fellow.\par
"Welcome to the Blue Bottle Tavern."\par
Subsequent visits : "Anything else I can do for you?"\par
name : "I'm Rob Frasier."\par
fras,foll : "I brew Frasier's Folly myself."\par
"'Tis a very popular ale hereabouts."\par
buy : "Which, mead, wine, bread, baked brie, or ale?"\par
job : "I sell mead, wine, bread, baked brie, and the house brew, Frasier's Folly."\par
brie : "Which of you?"\par
No character selected : "Suit yourself."\par
Character selected : "It's a fine cheese. We serve it warm with sliced almonds on top."\par
"It costs 6 crowns. Would you like some?"\par
yes, no gold-"You can't afford that right now."\par
yes, no room-"You don't have room to carry it."\par
yes-<NPC Name> serves <Character Name> a plate of brie.\par
mead,ale,brew,wine : "Which of you?"\par
No character selected : "Suit yourself."\par
Character selected : "That'll be # crowns, okay?"\par
no-"Suit yourself."\par
yes, no gold-"You can't afford that right now."\par
yes, full-"You don't have room to carry it."\par
yes-"Good!" <NPC Name> gives <Character Name> the <Item Name>.\par
"Enjoy!"\par
no-"Suit yourself."\par
brea,rati : "Which of you?"\par
"I charge 3 gold per loaf. How many do you want?"\par
No room : "You haven't any room in your pack."\par
No gold : "You can't afford that right now."\par
Purchased : <NPC Name> gives the bread to <Character Name>.\par
Can only afford/carry some : He gives <Character Name> # loaf/loaves of bread.\par
"That's all you can carry."\par
-or- : "That's all you can afford."\par
bye : "See you later."\par
other : "I can't help you with that."\par
Aganar\par
Introduction : a gentleman with an air of leadership about him.\par
Subsequent visits : "Good <Time of Day>, Avatar. Is there ought else I can aid thee with?"\par
Initial visit : "Thou art the Avatar! I saw thy portrait in Lord British's castle."\par
"If there be any assistance I can offer, thou needst but ask it."\par
name : "I am Lord Aganar of Moonglow."\par
job : "I keep things running smoothly here. 'Tis not difficult in a town of such honesty."\par
moon : "Verily, 'tis a fine town. Hast thou ever thought of moving here?"\par
no-"Thou wouldst not regret it."\par
yes-"There's good fishing off our shores, and plenty of merriment to be found over at the Blue Bottle."\par
fish : "Aye, indeed."\par
blue,bott,merr : "Thou wilt see much drinking at the Blue Bottle Tavern, and singing, and revelry, and telling of tales."\par
"But mostly drinking."\'b0\par
drin,sing,reve,tell,tale,tave : "If thou art curious, why not go pay a visit?"\par
"Thou cannot miss it - 'tis the biggest building in town."\par
hone : "Honesty is the virtue we prize most highly here in Moonglow."\par
"We are closest to the Shrine of Honesty, and indeed, the Rune of Honesty was entrusted into my care some years ago."\par
shri : "'Tis north of here, on Dagger Isle."\par
dagg,isle : "Aye, just a ways to the north."\par
rune,care : "I had it once, but I entrusted it to Beyvin's care, as he is the most honest man I know."\par
"He lives with Penumbra."\par
mant : "Penumbra might be able to help you with that."\par
penu : "I can't imagine what Beyvin sees in her!"\par
beyv : "Haven't seen him around lately. Penumbra should be able to tell you where to find him."\par
bye : "Until next we meet, then."\par
other : "Well you might ask..."\par
Manrel\par
Introduction : a pipe-smoking gentleman with the symbol of the Codex tattooed on his forehead.\par
"Greetings to you, <Gender>."\par
name : "My name is Manrel."\par
job : "I'm a woodworker. I also dabble in alchemy from time to time."\par
wood : "I make furniture, cabinets, walking sticks, and the like."\par
"Perhaps I can make something for you someday."\par
alch,dabb : "I'm trying to learn how to make healing potions, but I don't have the formula right yet."\par
"I did stumble across a wicked recipe for red mead, though."\par
red,mead : "Alas, there's little call for my brew in this town, with the Blue Bottle serving Frasier's Folly."\par
blue,bott : "A fine establishment."\par
fras,foll : "One of the finest libations you'll find anywhere."\par
liba : "Libation or liability - take your pick."\par
tatt,code,symb : "I went drinking with some friends the night we heard of the discovery of the Codex."\par
"When I woke up the next morning, I had this tattoo..."\par
beyv,lock,key,door,cryp : Have key : "I hope you got a chance to deliver the flowers."\par
Don't have key : "Oh, have you been to visit my cousin's grave?"\par
no-"My mistake."\par
yes-He looks at you suspiciously. "You wouldn't be wanting the key to his crypt, would you?"\par
no-"Well, alright then."\par
yes, full-"You're carrying too much right now. Come back for it later."\par
yes,not full-"Well, perhaps you have your reasons... Okay, you can have the key."\par
"But you have to take these flowers and leave them there."\par
flow : "Daffodils were always his favorites... It's too bad I couldn't find any."\par
daff : "Yes, daffodils."\par
bye : "Take care, my dear. I hope I'll see you again soon."\par
-or- : "It was a pleasure speaking with you."\par
other : "I can't help you with that."\par
Penumbra\par
Introduction : a small, inscrutable woman, cloaked in shadows.\par
Initial visit : "Ah, hello Avatar. I was wondering when you would get here."\par
Subsequent visits : "I see you have yet to fulfill your destiny."\par
name : "I am the one known as @Penumbra."\par
penu : "I am the daughter of the eclipse."\par
job : "I am a fortune teller."\par
fort,tell : "Yes, I can foretell your future for you."\par
fore,futu : "I require a small donation for my services."\par
How much do you give her?\par
Too much-You don't have that much.\par
no gold-"So be it."\par
Give gold-She holds her hands out on either side of her crystal ball, not quite touching it, and closes her eyes.\par
After a time, she speaks.\par
"The future looks dark. All is unclear."\par
"Some more gold would shed further light on your destiny..."\par
How much do you give her?\par
Too much-You don't have that much.\par
no gold-"So be it."\par
Give gold-"Though all is dark, I see a light at the end of the tunnel."\par
"Quickly - more coins before I lose the thread of this vision!"\par
How much do you give her?\par
Too much-You don't have that much.\par
no gold-"So be it."\par
Give gold-"Much conflict lies before you. Your end..."\par
"I cannot see it. More gold is needed."\par
How much do you give her?\par
Too much-You don't have that much.\par
no gold-"So be it."\par
Give gold-"You shall travel throughout the land before you are through."\par
"A few more coins and all should be clear."\par
How much do you give her?\par
Too much-You don't have that much.\par
no gold-"So be it."\par
Give gold-"You will journey into the depths of the earth..."\par
"Strange creatures will you face..."\par
"I can almost see the end now."\par
How much do you give her?\par
Too much-You don't have that much.\par
no gold-"So be it."\par
Give gold-"You and your companions will face terrible choices..."\par
"You will need powerful magic to prevail..."\par
"Wait... There is some barrier before me."\par
"Give me just one more coin and I think I can break through it."\par
How much do you give her?\par
Too much-You don't have that much.\par
no gold-"So be it."\par
Give gold-"Yes, now all is made clear to me!"\par
"I see a great Vortex."\par
"There is a violet lens that is crucial to your quest. It is broken, and must be made whole."\par
"But one lens is not enough! A blue lens is needed as well."\par
"You must have two lenses, else all is for naught."\par
She opens her eyes. "I can see no more for now. Leave me, that I might rest."\par
beyv : "Yes he was a terribly honest fellow."\par
"Alas, though, he lacked the virtue of tact."\par
"He told the truth once too often, and those he spoke of did not appreciate it."\par
"He's buried in the catacombs under Moonglow now, pushing up daffodils."\par
"Even virtue has its price."\par
daff : "Yes, daffodils."\par
hone : "I can tell you of both the rune and the mantra."\par
rune : "'Twas buried with Beyvin, rest his shade."\par
mant : "For five gold coins I can use my powers to divine the mantra for you. Shall I do this?"\par
no-"It is a small price for so profound a word."\par
yes, no gold-"Your ambitions outreach your means."\par
yes-She closes her eyes in concentration. For long minutes you wait.\par
If Dupre in party : "What are we waiting for!" whispers Dupre.\par
"She's doubtless fallen asleep, and you've wasted good money for nothing..."\par
Finally Penumbra opens her eyes again. "The word you seek is 'ahm.'"\par
bye : "Your destiny awaits."\par
other : "You must seek the answer to that elsewhere."\par
Derydlus\par
Introduction : a man who looks very amused--whether with his surroundings or himself is hard to say.\par
"Ah, welcome, <Gender>! Come have a drink with me!"\par
Initial visit : "Have you had your fortune told yet?"\par
yes/no-"Some people think Penumbra's a hoax. But she knows her stuff. You should bear with her - she can truly be of great assistance to you."\par
name : "Derydlus. And what was yours again?"\par
"Oh, yes, of course. Come, have a seat."\par
job : "Trying to discover all the subtleties of Frasier's Folly is almost a career in itself!"\par
He smiles.\par
drin : "Aye, this is the home of Frasier's Folly!"\par
subt,disc,fras,foll : "In all the towns of Britannia, you'll find no better brew."\par
mand : "Here's to Mandrake!"\par
manr : "My drinking buddy! Let's drink a toast to him, wherever he is."\par
If Manrel present : "I'll drink to that!"\par
penu : "She's a strange one, but she has the gift."\par
bye : "Leaving already? And you're not even wobbling yet..."\par
other : "I'll drink to that," he says, suiting action to words.\par
-or- : "'<Last Input>? Aye, indeed! A toast to <Last Input>!"\par
New Magincia\par
\par
Antonio\par
Introduction : a gentleman of slight build and refined manners.\par
Initial visit : "Greetings! I am Lord Antonio. Might I ask thy name?"\par
yes-Then prithee, what is it?"\par
no-"As you wish."\par
"The pleasure is all mine."\par
Subsequent visits, given name : "Greetings, <Avatar Name>! What brings thee here this <Time of Day>?"\par
name : "My name is Antonio."\par
job : "I govern New Magincia."\par
"Fortunately the fine people of this town have few disputes to settle, leaving me plenty of time for my hobby."\par
new,magin : "The city of humility is a lovely place to live."\par
time,hobb : "I do magic tricks. It brings a bit of cheer into this imperfect world."\par
magi,tric,chee : "Wouldst thou like to see one?"\par
no-"As you wish."\par
yes-"Splendid!" Antonio reaches into his pocket and takes out a balloon.\par
He blows it up until it bursts, and four doves appear from inside it, flying off towards the four points of the compass.*\par
"Did you enjoy that?"\par
no-"Too bad. Perhaps I should learn a better trick."\par
yes-"I knew you would. That's my favorite trick!"\par
rune,mant,humi : "The most humble one amongst us knows the mantra."\par
"If thou canst find out who that is, tell me, and I will give thee the rune."\par
humb : "Dost thou know who is the most humble person in this town?"\par
no-"Keep asking around."\par
yes-"Then what is that person's name?"\par
cono,star-Very astute of thee! Here is the rune, and I wish thee success on thy mission."\par
other-"'Tis not fitting that thou shouldst guess."\par
"Make sure thou dost know the answer before you speak with me again."\par
bye : "Until we meet again, may your road be short and your fortunes long."\par
other : "I cannot help thee with that."\par
William (U6)\par
Introduction : an old farmer who looks to have has made his peace with life.\par
"Howdy, stranger."\par
name : "M'name is William."\par
job : "I'm a farmer."\par
rune : "Ask Antonio."\par
anto : "The lord of New Magincia."\par
new,magi : "That's where ya are now."\par
humi,humb,farm : "Working the earth is the lowest form 'o labor."\par
"But it provides food for them as writes books, plays music, and other such things."\par
"Surely 'tis a humble living, to devote yer life to farmin'."\par
"It's about all I do with meself, 'cept when I find time for carvin' hippos."\par
carv,hipp : "I'll show ya one."\par
The old man gets a fiendish gleam in his eyes as he reaches into his pouch and takes out a small wooden hippo.\par
"Aint she purty?"\par
"If I don't make the purtiest gol' danged hippos you ever did see, you can call me Mortimer."\par
mort : "He's a mighty foolish fellow."\par
bye : "See ya."\par
other : "Can't help you there."\par
Conor\par
Introduction : a stalwart fellow, with a look of placid concentration.\par
If Iolo in party : You think you see a brief flicker of recognition pass between Iolo and the fisherman.\par
But before you can be certain, he turns to address you.\par
Initial visit : "Good <Time of Day>. Is there anything I can do for you?"\par
Subsequent visits : "Hello, <Avatar Name>. It's good to see you again."\par
name : "Oh, forgive me for not introducing myself. I am Conor Starfalcon. And what is your name?"\par
"Well met, <Gender>!"\par
iolo : "We've met before. But that was many years ago."\par
met,befo,many,year,ago : "Yes, long ago."\par
job : "I am a fisherman. In catching fish, as in all of life, there is something to be learned."\par
fish,catc,life,lear : "I still have not mastered the way of the fisherman."\par
"But I think perhaps the key to enlightenment lies not so much in the destination as in the road one travels."\par
mast,way,road,enli,dest,trav : "I am satisfied to live here and learn what I can from the fish."\par
shri : "The Shrine of Humility is far to the southeast."\par
"I'd be glad to take you there in my boat, but I'm afraid it is too small to weather the high seas."\par
boat : "It's down at the beach. Feel free to borrow it if you have need."\par
humb,humi : "You seek to find the humblest in New Magincia? That's a difficult task."\par
"I'd hate to commend one of my neighbors to you and fail to do justice to the others."\par
"The one thing I can tell you for certain is that it isn't me you're looking for."\par
mant : "The Mantra of Humility is 'lum'. If you seek the shrine, I hope you find it."\par
guil,kora : "I used to be a guildmaster. But that was long ago."\par
shie,war : "I no longer follow the way of the warrior."\par
bye : "If I can help you with anything else, let me know."\par
other : "I can't help you with that."\par
Charlotte\par
Introduction : a pretty young woman with downcast eyes.\par
Subsequent visits : "Hello again, <Gender>."\par
Initial visit : "Good <Time of Day>, <Gender>."\par
name : "I am called Charlotte Weaver, <Gender>."\par
job : "I am but a humble weaver, <Gender>."\par
weav : "I turn wool into cloth."\par
"I am not very good, but some people take pity on me and buy my cloth anyway."\par
buy,clot : Not at shop : "Come to my shop when I'm open!"\par
At shop : "Wouldst thou like some cloth?"\par
no-"As you wish, <Gender>."\par
yes-"Which of you?"\par
No character selected : "As you wish, <Gender>."\par
Character selected : "My cloth costs 25 gold. Interested, <Character Name>?"\par
no-"Thou knowest best, <Character Name>."\par
yes, full-"But 'twould make thee o'erburdened, <Character Name>!"\par
yes-"Many thanks!"\par
After accepting <Character Name>'s gold, <NPC Name> hands over the cloth.\par
yes, no gold-"But thou hast not enough gold, <Character Name>!"\par
sell,wool : Not at shop : "Come to my shop when I'm open!"\par
At shop : "Hast thou some wool to sell?"\par
no-"As you wish, milord/milady."\par
yes, no wool-"Begging thy pardon, but I see no wool!"\par
yes, have wool-"Aye, <Character Name>, I will buy wool from thee..."\par
"Which of you?"\par
No character selected : "As you wish..."\par
Character selected : "Will you take 10 gold crowns for a bale of wool, <Character Name>?"\par
no-"Perhaps some other time, then."\par
yes-"Done!" <NPC Name> hands <Character Name> 10 gold pieces and takes the wool.\par
silk : Not at shop : "Come to my shop when I'm open!"\par
If don't have silk : "Begging thy pardon, <Gender>, but I see no silk!"\par
If have silk : "Aye, <Character Name>, I can weave thy silk thread into cloth."\par
"It will cost thee 10 gold. Interested?"\par
no-"Thou knowest best, <Character Name>."\par
yes, no gold-"Begging thy pardon, <Character Name>, but thou dost not have 10 gold!"\par
yes-Turning to her loom, Charlotte soon weaves the thread into fine silk cloth.\par
"Finished!" She takes <Character Name>'s gold and hands over the cloth.\par
plan,ball,bag : If don't have plans : "I'm not sure what you mean."\par
If have plans/silk cloth : "Take the cloth to Marissa. Mayhap she can sew it into a bag for thee."\par
If have plans/silk thread : "I can weave that silk for thee... Then thou should speak with Marissa."\par
If have plans : "If you had some silk thread, I could help thee. Go ask Arbeth if he has any to spare."\par
mari : "She lives in Paws."\par
arbe : "He lives in Paws."\par
humb : "'Tis really not my place to speak of that, <Gender>."\par
"But honesty is a virtue too, and honesty forces me to admit that I am the humblest person in New Magencia."\par
bye : "Farewell, <Gender>!"\par
other : "'Tis really not my place to speak of that, <Gender>."\par
Dunbar\par
Introduction : a plump, jovial fellow chewing on a leg of lamb.\par
Initial visit : "Welcome to the Humble Palate."\par
Subsequent visits : "Anything else I can do for you?"\par
name : "My name is Dunbar," he says between bites of mutton.\par
buy : "Which, fish, ale, mead, wine, or mutton?"\par
job : "I sell fish, ale, mead, wine, and mutton."\par
fish : "Which of you?"\par
"I buy all my fish fresh from Conor. It's 3 gold per serving. Would you like some?"\par
no-\par
yes, but no gold-"I'm afraid you haven't enough money for it."\par
yes, but full-"You don't have room to carry it."\par
yes-<NPC Name> serves <Character Name> a fish.\par
"Next week we should have some red snapper."\par
mead,ale,wine : "Which of you?"\par
"For that I charge a modest # gold. Want some?"\par
no-\par
yes, but no gold-"I'm afraid you haven't enough money for it."\par
yes, but full-"You don't have room to carry it."\par
yes-"Here you go."\par
"I hope you enjoy it."\par
rati,mutt : "Which of you?"\par
"Rations cost 4 gold. How many do you want?"\par
Inventory full : <NPC Name> looks at <Character Name>. "You haven't any room in your pack."\par
No gold : "I'm afraid you haven't enough money for it."\par
Single ration : <NPC Name> hands the rations to <Character Name>.\par
Multiple rations : He hands <Character Name> # mutton ration(s).\par
Maximum can carry : "That's all you can carry."\par
Maximum can afford : "That's all you can afford."\par
humi,humb : "Serving others it the humblest occupation I could imagine. That's why I opened this place."\par
He pauses to wipe his mouth with the back of his hand.\par
cono : "I hear he used to be the head of some important guild."\par
impo,head,guil : "I don't know anything about it, but maybe it explains that strange glow you can see over by his house at night."\par
expl,stra,glow : "Go see for yourself."\par
no,bye : "See you later."\par
other : "I can't help you with that."\par
Katrina\par
Introduction : the humble peasant Katrina.\par
If in party : "I'm but a simple peasant, <Gender>."\par
"I doubt I could help in this situation."\par
If told to leave : "Good <Time of Day>, <Gender>. Wilt thou allow me to follow you again?"\par
yes-"Command me to join and I will, <Gender>."\par
no-"As thou deem best, <Gender>."\par
Subsequent visits : "Good <Time of Day>, <Gender>! I hope thou hast fared well in thy travels?"\par
yes-"The land rejoices when all is well with the Avatar!"\par
no-"If there is aught a humble peasant can do to help, I am yours to command."\par
Initial visit : "<Avatar Name>! I had heard that thou hadst returned to our land, but I dared not believe it!"\par
"Hast thou returned to save our land from the gargoyles?"\par
yes-"Then surely we are saved already!"\par
no-"Then perhaps the crisis is not so severe as rumor says."\par
"If there is aught a humble peasant might do to aid thy quest, <Gender>, I am yours to command."\par
name : "I am called Katrina, <Gender>, as I was the last time we met."\par
job : "Times have changed, <Gender>. Where once I grazed sheep, now I till the land."\par
"All work is the same to a peasant, <Gender>."\par
"We all do what is expected of us."\par
"If thou wouldst have me join thy quest, thou needst but ask."\par
join : Already in party : "Surely I misunderstand thee, <Gender>."\par
"Am I not already a member of thy band?"\par
Not in party : "Since thou dost think it wise, I wilt join."\par
"I hope I can aid thy quest."\par
Party full : "I hesitate to deny any request thou might have."\par
"But thou seemst to have enough companions as it is."\par
"Mayhap if one of them left your band, thou might have more need of me."\par
On a ship : "But <Gender>, there is no need to join you here, aboard ship."\par
"There is no place else to go!"\par
"Mayhap if thou asked again ashore."\par
leav : "Whatever thou thinkest best, <Gender>. I'll leave my equipment with thee."\par
On a ship : "But <Gender>, there is no place for me to go."\par
"Mayhap this should wait until we are ashore."\par
garg : "The gargoyles are a grave threat to the land, <Gender>."\par
"Many brave soldiers have died defending us from the invaders!"\par
humb,humi,most : "I am most sorry, <Gender>, but I cannot answer thy question."\par
"'Twould be vain of me to answer truthfully, and 'twould be worse to lie."\par
bye : If in party : "May we live up to the trust placed in us."\par
Not in party : "Farewell! The Avatar carries with him the hopes of all the land."\par
other : "A peasant such as myself knows little about <Last Input>, <Gender>."\par
-or- : "Beg pardon, <Gender>?"\par
Aurendir\par
Introduction : a short man dressed in shepherds clothing.\par
"Hi there!"\par
"Is there anything I can do for you?"\par
name : "Once I was Aurendir the mighty - now I live a more modest life."\par
job,life,shep : "I came here to meditate, tend sheep and sell wool."\par
tend,shee : "So they can be shorn."\par
shor : "To make wool. People buy it from me."\par
wool : "It's used to make thread."\par
buy : Would you like some wool?"\par
no-\par
yes-"Okay."\par
"Which of you?"\par
"I charge 5 gold for a bale of wool. Would you like some?"\par
yes, but full-"You look pretty full to me."\par
yes-"Very good." After accepting <Character Name>'s gold, <NPC Name> hands over the wool.\par
yes, but no gold-"I'm sorry, but you don't seem to have enough money."\par
no-\par
"It was a pleasure doing business with you."\par
thre : "To be woven into cloth."\par
wove,clot : "You can make robes from it."\par
robe : "I wear a robe while I tend sheep. It's all part of life's great circle."\par
life,circ : "From earth, to grass, to sheep, to me... when I die, I'll return to the earth."\par
die,buri,back,eart,gras : "That's right."\par
once,migh,mode,humi,humb : "I used to be a powerful and wealthy mage. I wore silk robes, and fine jewelry."\par
"In fact, I even had my own castle."\par
"But one day in my travels I visited the Shrine of Humility."\par
"Meditating there, I had an idea."\par
"I would give up all my earthly possessions and quit the practice of magic."\par
"I would live as a shepherd!"\par
"Surely this would be the greatest act of humility a man could perform."\par
"And so you see me here today."\par
powe,weal,mage,silk,jewe,cast,magi : "Those days are no more."\par
shri : "I should go there again soon... It changed my life."\par
medi,mant : "You should go meditate at the shrine yourself. I find 'lum' a most effective mantra."\par
bye : "See you later."\par
other : "Beats me."\par
Paws\par
\par
Patrick\par
Introduction : a colorfully garbed bard.\par
"Good <Time of Day>, ma'am/sirrah."\par
name : "Patrick's the name. What's yours?"\par
"A pleasure."\par
job : "Same as any bard - telling stories, singing songs, that sort of thing."\par
bard : "I was trained in the conservatory, like most of us."\par
cons : "Johann, Lazeena, Sionnach--they all studied there."\par
"Of course, there are always oddballs like Mandrake."\par
joha,laze,sion : "A fine bard indeed."\par
mand : "Completely self taught, he is. Got some odd ideas about the eight virtues."\par
"I have to give him credit, though..."\par
"Last time we gathered together for a songwriting competition, he won first prize easily."\par
virt,eigh : "Ask him yourself."\par
stor : Ok, here's one..."\par
\par
"The owl and the pussycat sailed to sea\par
In a beautiful pea green boat.\par
Along came a spider and sat down beside them,\par
And the cat said 'Whose been sleeping in my bed!'\par
The clock struck one, the owl fell down,\par
And three little piggies went 'Wee wee wee wee wee' all the way home."\par
\par
"I don't understand it at all, but Dr. Cat says that's his favorite story."\par
cat : "He's a decent guy, and he doesn't water his drinks either."\par
"He told me I should learn a story with some ducks in it, though."\par
drin : "Being a bard can be thirsty work."\par
thir : "A warrior mustn't let his blade grow dull, right?"\par
"Well, so also must a bard keep his throat from getting too dry!"\par
duck : "Don't ask me. If he likes ducks that's his business."\par
song : He clears his throat...\par
"A lusty young smith at his feist stood a-firing,\par
His hammer lay by but his forge still aglow,\par
When to him a buxom young damsel came smiling,\par
And asked if to work at her forge he would go."\par
\par
"With a jingle vang jingle vang jingle vang jingle,\par
With a jingle vang jingle vang jingle hi ho."\par
\par
"'I will' said the smith and they went off together,\par
\par
"Unto the young damsel's forge they did go.\par
They stripped to go to it--'twas hot work and hot weather,\par
She kindled the fire and she soon made him glow."\par
\par
"With a jingle vang jingle vang jingle vang jingle,\par
With a jingle vang jingle vang jingle hi ho!"\par
\par
"I hope you enjoyed the song!"\par
bye : "Fare thee well."\par
other : "That's an excellent question. Ask me another one!"\par
Thindle\par
Introduction : a little, white haired man hunched over with age.\par
Subsequent visits : "Back, back, back they come." He smiles to himself and claps his hands.\par
Initial visit : "Yes, yes, yes," he says, bobbing his head up and down.\par
name : "Thindle the spindler." He grins at you.\par
thin : "Yes, yes, yes. That was quite a guess!"\par
buy : Oh my, oh my, you must need cloth."\par
At pub : "Come to my shop when I'm open and I'll sell you some!"\par
At store : "Which of you?"\par
No character selected : "Very well, but 'tis fine cloth, yes indeed..."\par
Character selected : "It'll cost you 15 gold for the cloth. Interested?"\par
yes, but full-"You look pretty full to me."\par
yes-"Excellent!" After accepting <Character Name>'s gold, <NPC Name> hands over the cloth.\par
yes, but no gold-"No discounts, friend. Sorry."\par
no-"Very well, but 'tis fine cloth, yes indeed..."\par
sell : "Sell, now, its thread I feel."\par
At pub : "Come to my shop when I'm open and I'll buy it!"\par
At store : "Which of you?"\par
No character selected : "Very well, very well, I can see you don't want to sell."\par
No thread : "Sorry, you don't have any thread."\par
Character has thread : <NPC Name> turns to <Character Name>, and says "Will you take 6 gold for that Thread?"\par
yes-"Done!" He hands <Character Name> 6 gold pieces and takes the thread.\par
no-"Very well, very well, I can see you don't want to sell."\par
job : "Sew, sew, I sew 'cause I said so."\par
sew : "Beautiful clothes, more pretty than those," he points to your stomach.\par
beau,clot : "Yes again, friend!"\par
mort : "Shorty is my friend. We play flippits together."\par
silk,bag,ball : "Silk? Oh no, oh no."\par
"Can't work silk, oh my, no."\par
"See Charlotte. She can, yes she can!"\par
char : "Humble Charlotte, yes. She can help you."\par
"She lives in New Magincia."\par
flip : "You should learn, you should learn."\par
"A nice piece of bone and a small hard pea--that's all ya need."\par
nice,piec,bone : "Like an old dog bone. You'll need a hat too."\par
smal,hard,pea : "The smaller, the better." He pulls an old bone from his pocket and a small pea.\par
"Now you get a hat."\par
hat : He puts the hat down and mumbles "Put the pea in front of bone..."\par
He gestures with his hands. "...and flippit on home." The pea sails into the hat.\par
bye : "Bye now. Bye. Say hi to Mortude if you see him."\par
other : He scratches his head and looks around.\par
Mortude\par
Introduction : a man nearly as wide as he is tall.\par
Subsequent visits : "What now?" he sighs.\par
Initial visit : "What?" he grumbles.\par
name : "As the sign on my door reads, 'Mortude the Ropemaker.'"\par
mort : "What?" He snorts a bit then clears his throat.\par
job : He looks at you and raises one eyebrow. "I said I makes rope."\par
buy,make,rope : "The strongest you'll ever tug!" he says, pushing out his chest.\par
At pub : "Come to my shop when I'm open and I'll show you!"\par
Not at pub : "Which of you?"\par
Character not selected : "Too bad. You'll never find better rope."\par
Character selected : <NPC Name> smiles at <Character Name>, "For my fine rope it will cost you 5 gold. Interested?"\par
no-"Too bad. You'll never find better rope."\par
yes, but full-"You look pretty full to me."\par
yes-"Fine, fine!" After accepting <Character Name>'s gold, <NPC Name> hands over the rope.\par
yes, no gold-"You don't have enough gold."\par
thin : "He's a pretty good flippits, player."\par
flip : "You have a bone on ya? We'll play."\par
bone : "An old dog bone or somethin'?"\par
old,dog : "The smaller, the better. And maybe a hat."\par
hat : "A haaat," he repeats, mockingly. "Never played 'ave ya?"\par
no : "Too bad."\par
bye : "Yeah, yeah." He plods off, grumbling.\par
other : "Oh, never mind..."\par
-or- : He plays with his braided hair a moment then shrugs.\par
Marissa\par
Introduction : a finely adorned woman with a tight mouth and wide eyes.\par
Subsequent visits : "Hello again."\par
Initial visit : "Hello." She bows formally.\par
At pub : She bows stiffly. "I'm sorry, good madam/sir, but my shop is closed for now."\par
"See me some other time, when I am available for business."\par
name : "Marissa. You may call me '@Miss Trihune."\par
miss,trih : "Yes, that is much better."\par
buy,tuni,dres,pant,clot : "Which of you?"\par
No character selected : "Suit yourself," she sniffs, offended.\par
Character selected : 1. Tunic\par
2. Dress\par
3. Pants\par
"Which one?"\par
"It'll cost you 1 gold for that <Item Name>. Interested?"\par
yes, full-"You look pretty full to me."\par
yes-"Excellent!" After accepting <Character Name>'s gold, <NPC Name> hands over the <Item Name>.\par
yes, no gold-<NPC Name> looks at <Character Name>. "How rude! Don't ask for something you can't pay for!"\par
no-"Suit yourself," she sniffs, offended.\par
sell : No cloth for sale : "Sorry, none of you has anything of interest."\par
"Which of you?"\par
No character selected : "Just as well. That cloth is rather shabby..."\par
Character has no cloth : "I don't see any cloth, other than what you're wearing!"\par
Have cloth : <NPC Name> turns to <Character Name> and asks "Will you take 20 gold for that cloth?"\par
yes-"Done!" She hands <Character Name> 20 gold pieces and takes the cloth.\par
no-"Just as well. That cloth is rather shabby..."\par
silk : "Yes, I can work with silk. But 'tis out of fashion..."\par
"Nobody wears silk clothes this season."\par
arbe : "Oh, he's a threadmaker who lives here in town."\par
"Silly little man, but a fine spinner."\par
"I get all my thread straight from him. No other source would do."\par
bolt : "Yes, that silly Arbeth person can spin spidersilk into thread."\par
"Charlotte, from New Magincia, weaves thread into silk cloth."\par
"Bring me a bolt of her finest silk cloth, and then I can sew you a silk bag."\par
ball,mamm,bag,plan : "Oh, I understand. A large silk bag."\par
"Well, 'tis hardly a challenge for one of my skills. But, since it is important, I'll do it."\par
If no plans : "But I'll need to see the plans."\par
If no silk : "But I'll need a bolt of silk to do it, of course."\par
If have silk and plans : "But it will cost you 75 gold. Alright?"\par
yes, but no gold-"Come back when you have the gold, <Character Name>."\par
yes-She takes the silk cloth and begins to work, following the balloon plans.\par
She works in silence, intent on her sewing.\par
After a while, she completes the silk bag.\par
"There, 'tis done!" she cries, handing you the bag.\par
no-"Very well," she sniffs, offended.\par
job : "I create garments of the highest fashion."\par
high,fash : "Clothes fit to see the King in."\par
bye : "Yes, well, come see me again." She yawns widely.\par
other : "Hmph! I am not a gossip, <Gender>."\par
-or- : "'Tis not my place to speak of that..."\par
Arbeth\par
Introduction : a frightened little man who never looks you in the eye.\par
If at pub : He looks up from his mug of ale.\par
Subsequent visits : "Oh, it's you. Hello."\par
Initial visit : "Hello."\par
If not at pub : Initial visit : "Yes?" he asks, looking like he expects to be beaten any minute.\par
Subsequent visits : "Yes? Oh, it's you." He almost looked you in the eyes then.\par
"What do you want from me?"\par
name : "He looks around at the ground and mumbles "Arbeth."\par
arbe : "Arbeth," he repeats quietly.\par
job,shop : "Well," he says so quietly you have to lean close to hear, "I make wool into thread."\par
thre : "Yes," he says, wringing his hands together.\par
weav : "I'm not a weaver, <Gender>, just a spinner. Talk to Thindle."\par
thin : "He lives here in Paws and is a fine weaver."\par
spid,silk,plan,ball : "What? Oh, yes, I could spin spidersilk into thread. Do you want me to?"\par
At pub : "Not now, <Gender>," he says timidly. "My shop is closed."\par
no-"Oh. Sorry," he mumbles.\par
yes-"Which of you?"\par
No character selected : "Oh. Sorry," he mumbles.\par
Character selected : "'Tis a most difficult job, <Character Name>. It'll cost thee 20 gold!"\par
"Still interested?"\par
no-"Oh. Sorry," he mumbles.\par
yes-"Good, good!" He seems much brighter and happier now.\par
Don't have silk-"Oh, but I'll need twoscore bits of spidersilk to do it!"\par
"Come back when thou hast 40 pieces of spidersilk and I'll make thy thread then."\par
yes, inventory full-"Oh, but you'll not be able to carry it, <Character Name>!"\par
"Come back when thy load is lighter and I'll make thy thread then."\par
yes, no gold-"You haven't the gold."\par
yes-Arbeth takes <Character Name>'s gold and silk and starts spinning...\par
Soon he has finished a spool of fine silk thread!\par
"There it is, <Character Name>, my finest work! A true pleasure!"\par
Arbeth hands <Character Name> the spool of silk.\par
"You'll have to find a weaver, of course..."\par
sell,wool : No wool : "None of you has any wool," he mutters.\par
Have wool : "Which of you?" "Will you take 6 gold for that wool?"\par
yes-He hands <Character Name> 6 gold pieces and takes the bale of wool.\par
yes, character has no wool-"But you don't have any wool!"\par
no-\par
buy,thre : "Which of you?\par
"Will you pay 3 gold for a spool of thread?"\par
yes, full-"You look pretty full to me."\par
yes-After accepting <Character Name>'s gold, <NPC Name> hands over the thread.\par
yes, no gold-"You haven't the gold."\par
no-\par
timo : "He is nice to me." he stops wringing his hands and seems to relax momentarily.\par
mort : "He's much too loud." He looks up suddenly and his face goes ashen.\par
loud : "But...I mean...maybe not too loud."\par
He whips his head around as if he's looking for someplace to hide.\par
mari,dori : "She's alright, I guess."\par
gris,hend,uber : "He's alright, I guess."\par
meri : A smile crosses his face. "I like her. She brought me cookies once."\par
bye : "Bye," he whispers.\par
other : He twists his shoulders around and holds his palms up.\par
Grison\par
Introduction : a figure covered from head to toe with flour.\par
If at pub : "Ach, I'd like to talk with ya, but I've no time!"\par
"Come see me at my gristmill some other time."\par
"'Tis hard work, but it gives me plenty of time to talk!"\par
Subsequent visits : "Hrmph... ptuh... hello again."\par
Initial visit : "Ptuh... ptuh... hello."\par
name : "Grison Fairfleth, at your service."\par
gris,fair : "You can call me 'Gris' if ya prefer."\par
job : "As you can see, I turn grain into flour."\par
"It's a pretty demanding job...and a bit messy too."\par
buy,flou : "Which of you?"\par
No character selected : "Suit yourself."\par
Character selected : "I'll sell you a sack of flour for 4 gold. Is that okay\par
yes, full-"You look pretty full to me."\par
yes-"Excellent!" <NPC Name> hands over the flour.\par
yes, no gold-"You can't afford it."\par
no-"Suit yourself."\par
sell,grai : no grain : "I'd buy some grain, if you had any."\par
have grain : "Which of you?"\par
No character selected : "Suit yourself."\par
Selected character has no grain : "But ya don't have any grain!"\par
Selected character has grain : <NPC Name> turns to <Character Name>, and says "I'll pay you 3 crowns for that sack of grain, ok?"\par
yes-"Done!" He hands <Character Name> 3 gold pieces and takes the sack.\par
no-"Suit yourself."\par
timo : "He's a good fellow. I grew up with him."\par
grew,up : "Yep. We were mates." He continues to wipe the dust from his eyes.\par
mort : "Shorty, ya mean? He's got a fair temper, I'll tell you that!"\par
mari : "She's one with a nose to the air instead of the grindstone." He chuckles to himself.\par
arbe : "Scared of his own shadow, he is."\par
dori : "She's baked many a pie with my flour."\par
meri : "Meri the wisp, eh? She's sure a cutey."\par
hend : "One o' the nicest gents I know. Always has a good tale."\par
uber : "A good, hard worker, that man. Has quite a strong grip too."\par
bye : "Well, if that's all you need, goodbye."\par
other : He sticks a finger in his ear and shakes it. "What?"\par
Dorin\par
Introduction : a plump older woman with an apron about her waist.\par
Subsequent visits : "Oh, good, you've come back. Perhaps for some pie?" She smiles broadly.\par
Initial visit : "Hello," she says in a scratchy yet firm voice. "What can I do for ye?"\par
name : "Dorin...and yours?"\par
"That's nice."\par
moth : "She was a wonderful cook. Taught me all I know."\par
dori : "It was my mother's name."\par
job : "At the moment, only Meri and I are here, so I guess I must conduct the business."\par
shee,busi : "We are shepherds. We sell wool."\par
timo : "He and I like to care for the less fortunate people in town. I like him alot."\par
shor,mort : "Old Shorty, eh? He's actually quite a nice little man."\par
mari : "A bit caught up in herself, but likable."\par
arbe : "Poor little guy. He's afraid of the dark, or so I'm told."\par
gris : "He has the best flour in all the land."\par
meri : "She's my little angel. If you see her around here, tell her I have errands to run."\par
hend : She winces at his name. "He is a hard worker, but sometimes his smell is quite strong."\par
uber : "I like to go on walks with Uby. He has such an interesting life."\par
pie : "Oh, dear, I'm afraid you just missed the last piece."\par
"But I'm baking another, and I'll be sure to save you a slice!"\par
"Yes, I'm baking the nicest shepherd's pie right now."\par
"It's not done yet, but you can have a slice as soon as it is!"\par
buy,sell,wool : "Which of you?"\par
"We charge 5 gold for a bale of wool. Would you like some?"\par
yes, but full-"You look pretty full to me."\par
yes-"Very good." After accepting <Character Name>'s gold, <NPC Name> hands over the wool.\par
yes, no money-"I'm sorry, but you don't seem to have enough money."\par
no-"It was a pleasure doing business with you."\par
bye : She wipes her hand on her apron, and then waves it at you.\par
other : "Sorry, don't know about any <Last Input>."\par
Merideth\par
Introduction : a little girl with a doll in her hands.\par
Initial visit : "Now you be still, they won't hurt us." She hugs her doll close.\par
Subsequent visits : "See, Becky, they've come back." she says to her doll.\par
"What do you want?"\par
name : "Merideth Cassandra Lamby!"\par
meri,cass,lamb : "I'm named after my great aunt."\par
grea,aunt : "She lives far away."\par
job : "Oh, I don't work. My Memah can help you though."\par
mema : "My grandma. She's around here somewhere."\par
timo : "He's a nice man. He got me this doll." She displays it proudly.\par
shor,mort : "He put a rope in a tree for me to swing on."\par
mari : "She's a mean woman. Never plays dolls or nothin'."\par
arbe : "He is my secret friend. He tells me stories."\par
gris : "I think he is a ghost. He's scary." She hugs her doll.\par
hend : "She wrinkles up her face. "He doesn't smell too good."\par
uber : "He brings my Memah flowers sometimes."\par
bye : "She waves her dolls hand at you and says "Bye."\par
other : "Have you heard of that Becky?" she says to her doll.\par
Hendle\par
Introduction : a man whose pungent smell greets you before he can.\par
"Well, hello there, friend/stranger\par
Subsequent visits : "Back for more meat?"\par
Initial visit : "Come for some meat?"\par
name : "Hendle the Slaughterman."\par
hend,slau : "Yep."\par
job : If at work : "As ya can see, I slaughter the beef and pork which you can then buy."\par
If in pub : "I slaughter beef and pork."\par
"Makes me a bit unpopular 'ere in the pub!" he laughs.\par
buy,meat : If at pub : "Strewth! If I carried it around with me, I'd be even more unpopular!"\par
He laughs, then continues, "Nay, friend, come to my shop later."\par
"I'll fix ya up then."\par
If at work : "Which of you?"\par
None selected : "Whatever."\par
Character selected : 1. Ham\par
2. Bacon\par
3. Pork Chops\par
4. Brisket\par
5. Steak\par
6. Ribs\par
"Which item?"\par
None selected : "Whatever."\par
Item selected : Hendle smiles at <Character Name>, "That will cost you # gold. Interested?"\par
no-"Whatever."\par
yes, but full-"You look pretty full to me, <Character Name>."\par
yes-"Excellent!" After accepting <Character Name>'s gold, <NPC Name> hands over the food.\par
yes, not enough gold-"You don't have enough gold, <Character Name>."\par
bye : "Be careful out there."\par
other : If at work : He stops chopping and scratches his chin. "Say what?"\par
If at pub : He takes a swig from his mug and asks, "What d'ya mean?"\par
Ubermon\par
Introduction : a tall man with a disarming grin.\par
Initial visit : "Hello, mein freund"\par
His thick fingers grab your hand.\par
Subsequent visits : "You are back. Gut." He leans back on his heels.\par
name : "Ubermon Kalbmilch."\par
uber,kalb : "At your zervice." He snaps to attention.\par
job : "I milk de cows und make de cheese."\par
If store open : You vant to buy someting, just say de word."\par
If store closed : "You vant to buy someting, come by my dairy ven I'm open."\par
buy,word : If store closed : "Come by my dairy ven I'm open, ja?"\par
If store open : "Ja, sure, vat you vant - milk or cheese?"\par
milk, chee : If store closed : "Come by my dairy ven I'm open, ja?"\par
If store open : "Which of you?"\par
None selected : "Vell, okay..."\par
Character selected : "That'll be # crowns, okay?"\par
no-"Vell, okay, but is very good for you!"\par
yes, no gold-"You have not ze gold right now."\par
yes, inventory full-"You don't have room to carry it."\par
yes-"Good!" <NPC Name> gives <Character Name> the cheese/milk.\par
bye : "Take care among ze British, now."\par
other : "Now I not know vat you say."\par
Timothy\par
Introduction : a man with sea-blue eyes and a warm smile.\par
Subsequent visits : "Welcome back, my friend"\par
Initial visit : "Welcome, welcome, friend"\par
"Here for lodging this fine <Time of Day>?"\par
name : "Timothy." He flashes a friendly smile and nods.\par
timo : "I'm named after my uncle. He was a kind soul."\par
uncl : "Sir Timothy Enders Daverstock. He was a famous knight in these parts."\par
job : "It is a busy one - this job, that is. I find it rewarding, though, meeting friendly faces."\par
"Maybe you want a room, eh?"\par
yes,room,inn,lodg : "# gold for you to stay and have a meal, good?"\par
yes, no gold-"I'm sorry, but we require cash in advance for our rooms."\par
yes, have gold-You sleep in a comfortable bed...\par
You wake rested and eat a large breakfast.\par
"Good morning, have a good day."\par
no-"Perhaps some other time, then."\par
famo,knig : "He is perhaps best known for his courage in battle."\par
cour,batt : "He once held off a score of men while his own fled to safety across a bridge."\par
bye : "Farewell, friend. Travel safely."\par
other : "Hmm... Nope, can't help you there."\par
Dr. Cat\par
Introduction : an amused looking gentleman.\par
Taynith visiting : "You'll have to excuse me, but the bar's closed right now."\par
"Taynith and I have a lot to talk about."\par
If closed : "Come by the Cat's Lair when I'm open for business."\par
If Sherry in party : "Ah, I see you've brought me a tasty little mouse to feed my pets..."\par
"Eeeeek!"\par
"Don't worry, I was just kidding... Any friend of Lord British is a friend of mine."\par
Initial visit : "Welcome to the Cat's Lair."\par
Subsequent visits : "Anything else I can do for you?"\par
name : "My name's Dr. Cat."\par
pet,cat : "If you treat my cats well, they'll treat you the same."\par
buy,sell : "Which, ale, mead, wine, milk, or mutton?"\par
mead,ale,wine : "Which of you?"\par
"That's # crowns. Want some?"\par
no-\par
yes, but full-"You don't have room to carry it."\par
yes, not enough gold-"You're a bit short on gold."\par
yes-"Here you are." <NPC Name> gives <Character Name> the <Item Name>.\par
"Drink up and enjoy, for who knows what tomorrow may bring?"\par
milk : "Which of you?"\par
"Milk is very good for you, and only 5 crowns for a whole bucket. Want some?"\par
no-If you aren't thirsty, you could always get some to give to the cats."\par
"It's the quickest way to get on their good side."\par
yes, but full-"You don't have room to carry it."\par
yes-<NPC Name> gives <Character Name> the milk. "You have good taste, my friend."\par
yes, not enough gold-"You're a bit short on gold."\par
rati, mutt : "Which of you?"\par
"I sell the finest mutton, and for only 3 gold per serving. How many servings do you want?"\par
Inventory full : <NPC Name> looks at <Character Name>. "You haven't any room in your pack."\par
Not enough gold : "You're a bit short on gold."\par
Bought items : <NPC Name> hands the rations to <Character Name>.\par
He hands <Character Name> # mutton ration(s).\par
If inventory partially full : "That's all you can carry."\par
If short on gold : "That's all you can afford."\par
job : "I sell ale, mead, wine, milk, and mutton. Of course I like to chat with my patrons, and indulge in a friendly game every now and then."\par
indu,game : "Thindle and Mortude may not agree, but I like a game that provides a little intellectual challenge."\par
inte,chal : "I think I've got time for a quick game of Nim..."\par
"Would you care to wager on the outcome, just to keep things interesting?"\par
no-"Well, maybe after you've had a few practice games."\par
yes-"Tell you what... I'm in a reckless mood. This time you can bet as much as you like."\par
-or- : "Excellent! How much would you like to bet?"\par
If don't have enough : "You don't have that much..."\par
If bet more than 50 gold : "That's a little steep for a friendly game. Let's just make it 50 crowns."\par
"Let me just remind you of the rules, in case you don't remember."\par
"We start with ten pieces." He takes some colorful glass beads out of his pocket.\par
"Each player takes turns, taking one, two or three beads out of the pile."\par
"Whoever gets the last one wins!"\par
"I'll play first this time."\par
-or- : "I'll let you play first this time."\par
There are # beads left. How many do you take?\par
"I'll take # bead(s)."\par
If Avatar loses : "I won!"\par
"Don't take it too hard... I've had a lot of practice."\par
"I'll put your money someplace safe, in case you want to come and win it back later."\par
If Avatar wins : "Well done! You got the last bead."\par
He takes some money out of a pouch and pays off your wager.\par
"Would you like to play again?"\par
no-"Purrrrhaps some other time, then."\par
thin,mort : "I'm sure he'd be glad to play a few rounds of flippits with you."\par
play,flip : "If only I had a copy of Snilwit's Big Book of Boardgame Strategy..."\par
"Then I could find some really fine games to teach everyone."\par
snil,book,boar,stra,teac : "Have you got a copy of Snilwit's that you'd be willing to sell?"\par
no-"That's too bad. I'd pay well for it."\par
yes, don't have book-"You must be mistaken."\par
yes, inventory full-"Put down some stuff, <Character Name>, so you can carry some gold!"\par
yes, sell book-"Great! This is the definitive reference on boardgames."\par
He takes the book and gives you/<Character Name> # gold crowns.\par
patr : "This is a nice friendly town. All the townsfolk know each other. We get a lot of visitors, too."\par
visi : "I chose Paws for my tavern because it's right on the King's Way, midway between Britain and Trinsic."\par
"There's no better travelled spot in all Britannia, and that makes for good business."\par
paw : "I like the name of the town too, of course!"\par
brit : "A nice place to visit, eh?"\par
trin : "A bit too honorable for my tastes, if you know what I mean..."\par
tayn : "Taynith is my dearest friend. Her gypsy band travels the King's Way."\par
"Once a week, she stops in to say hello."\par
gyps,band,pass,week : "Don't get the two gypsy bands mixed up... Taynith travels with Zoltan."\par
"The other group are a bunch of pickpockets and scallawags..."\par
zolt : "Yes, Zoltan, king of the gypsies!"\par
king : "I guess you can call yourself king of anything, if nobody comes along to dispute it..."\par
duck : "A friend of Taynith's, are you? Here, have one on the house." He hands you an ale.\par
"Taynith bet me one time I couldn't catch a duck with my bare hands."\par
"So I did, and had a leash made for it, so I could give it to her as a pet."\par
"I doubt she still has it, though. I saw Zoltan eyeing it hungrily..."\par
purr : "Very good! you purr almost as well as Kytyn."\par
kyty : "She lives in Britain."\par
mand : "Are you friends of that deadbeat? He owes me for more drinks than I care to think about."\par
"The only reason I give him food and drink is because he can't sing with his mouth full!"\par
bye : "Good night, sweet prince, and flights of angels tend thee to thy rest."\par
other : "Meow."\par
\par
Serpent's Hold\par
\par
Sentri\par
Introduction : a handsome warrior.\par
Subsequent visits : "Good <Time of Day>, <Avatar Name>. I hope you have returned to ask me to join you."\par
Initial visit : "<Avatar Name! You have come at last!"\par
name : "It is I, Sentri." (He pronounces his name 'Sahn-tray.')\par
job : I have been waiting here for you."\par
"I heard you had returned, and knew you would come here eventually."\par
wait,retu,hear,here : Britannia needs your help now more than ever before."\par
"Many have set out to fight the gargoyles already."\par
brit,need,help,figh,garg : Not just the town guards, but any able bodied men that could be spared from their work."\par
"The battle goes poorly. But now that you are here, there is hope. I stand ready to join you."\par
join : If in party : "I have joined you already!"\par
If not in party : "Shall I join your party?"\par
no-"I bow to your wisdom. If you have need of me later, you have but to ask."\par
yes, but in boat-"It would be best if you got out of that vessel first."\par
yes, but party full-"You have enough companions now.""If you tell one of them to leave first, then I'll join you."\par
yes-"So be it. Now that we are together, surely the realm will be saved."\par
bye : If you should pass this way again, I will be here. I await but the opportunity to join you."\par
other : "I beg your pardon, could you repeat that?\par
leave : "Has the time come when your plans call for me to wait in reserve?"\par
no-"Then let's be on about our mission!"\par
yes, but in boat-"Let's get our feet back on solid ground first, okay?"\par
yes-"Then I shall go wait at Serpent's Hold until you need me again."\par
"I'd best leave you my equpiment in case you need it on your quest."\par
Gherick\par
Introduction : a tall man, covered with scars and drooling uncontrollably.\par
Subsequent visits : "Back again?"\par
Initial visit : "What do you want?"\par
buy : "I's a great craftsman, I is. Me shop is 'uge!"\par
"You'll hafta be more specific: arms or armor?"\par
weap,arms : If store closed : "Come to my shop when I'm open!"\par
If store open : "Which of you?"\par
"Which item?"\par
"That <Item Name> costs # gold."\par
"Interested, <Character Name>?"\par
yes, inventory full-"What's this? You can't carry no <Item Name>, <Character Name>"\par
yes-"Great!"\par
After accepting <Character Name>'s gold, <NPC's Name> hands over the <Item Name>.\par
yes, not enough gold : "What's this? You can't afford no <Item Name>, <Character Name>!"\par
Halberd,Hammer,Morning Star,Throwing Axe,2-Handed Axe :\par
armo : Black Shield,Door Shield,Scale Mail,Spiked Collar,Spiked Helm,Spiked Shield :\par
sell : If not in shop : "Come to my shop when I'm open!"\par
If have nothing of value : "You ain't got nothing I wants."\par
If have something of value : "Aye, <Character Name> got somethin' interestin'..."\par
"Which of you?"\par
"Which item?"\par
"I'll give ya # gold for that <Item Name>, <Character Name>. Whaddya say?"\par
no-"I don't bargain, mate. # and not a copper."\par
-or- : "Well, how 'bout somethin' else?"\par
-or- : "Changed your mind, eh?"\par
yes-"Done!" <NPC Name> hands <Character Name> # gold pieces and takes the <Item Name>.\par
magi,shie,orde,serp : If already made shield : "What, you gone daft?"\par
"I already made ya one!"\par
If not talked to Koranada : "Go talk ta Koranada about that first."\par
If not at shop : "Come to my shop when I'm open!"\par
If talked to Koranada, not made shield : "Huh? Oh, yeah, da serpent shield."\par
He looks around and then at the ceiling.\par
"I needs a snake shield, a chunk o' gold, and a magic gem."\par
"Have ya got dese tings?"\par
yes, and have items-He holds up a beautiful golden shield that glows softly.\par
"Here ya go. Just as promised."\par
yes, but don't have items-"You ain't got all that I asked for."\par
"Come back when ya do!"\par
no-"What else can I get ya?"\par
name : "Gherick."\par
gher : "Are ya learnin' how ta speak or do ya need somethin'?"\par
job : "I makes the most hideous weapons!"\par
hide : If karma high : "You ain't the sort what'd be interested."\par
If karma low : "I ain't gonna tell you, you'd steal me brilliant ideas!"\par
"I got some other stuff you could buy, though."\par
aman : "She's got the best food in the land. Go see for yerself."\par
segg : "A fine warrior. New to this area."\par
bye : "Shut the door on yer way out," he snarls.\par
other : He doesn't hear you.\par
-or- : He hears you but doesn't respond.\par
Shubin\par
Introduction : a man with a wide bottom. His voice is almost like a woman's.\par
Initial visit : "Ooh, you look so thin! Here, have a bite of bread."\par
He gives you a roll; it is still warm from the oven.\par
Subsequent visits : "Why, hello there, <Gender>."\par
name : "My name is Shubin, <Gender>."\par
job : I'm a cook, <Gender>."\par
sand : "He is my friend."\par
mant : "Sandy says the mantra of eating is 'yum,' <Gender>. Hee, hee!"\par
If Iolo in party : You friend Iolo rolls his eyes. "Such wisdom we can surely do without!"\par
"That's one of the eight mantras, isn't it?"\par
no-"Oh, do not tease old Shubin so, <Gender>!"\par
yes-"Oh, thank you, thank you, thank you!"\par
thin,roll : If given rolls : "I have no more rolls, <Gender>."\par
If not given rolls : He ask anxiously "Do you like it, <Gender>?"\par
no-"Such a picky eater. No wonder you're so skinny, <Gender>."\par
yes-"Have a whole tray, then."\par
cook : "Being a cook is like being an adventurer, <Gender>."\par
adve : "Yes, <Gender>. I must gather up all my ingredients with care."\par
care : "So that I have the right ingredients, <Gender>."\par
ingr : "Adventurers are always searching for this or that, <Gender>. So are cooks."\par
"Do you know of Magincian Pastry?"\par
It is a marvellous dish, <Gender>. My friend Sandy gave me the recipe..."\par
"I'm only missing one ingredient..."\par
"Well, I'd like to make it, <Gender>, but I cannot get one of the ingredients..."\par
"I sure would appreciate it if you brought it back for me if you came across one in your travels, <Gender>..."\par
"If you could find time for old Shubin, that is..."\par
"Would it be too much trouble to bring me back a dragon's egg, <Gender>?"\par
yes-He sighs. "Well, <Gender>, it did no harm to ask, I suppose."\par
no-"I just know you will remember Shubin, <Gender>. Thank you."\par
drag,egg : "Have you one with you?"\par
bye : "Goodbye, <Gender>."\par
Amanda\par
Introduction : a large black woman with a loud laugh.\par
Initial visit : "Hello, hello!" she cries, clapping her hands together.*\par
Subsequent visits : "You're here again! Good." She smiles widely. "What can I get ya?"\par
name : "Amanda, but you can call me 'Miss Mandy'."\par
buy : "Which, ale, mead, wine, rations or Waybread?"\par
ale, mead, wine : "Which of you?"\par
"That'll be #1 crowns, okay sugar?"\par
If not enough gold : "Come back when you have some gold."\par
If inventory full : "You don't have room to carry it."\par
If purchased : "Here you are." Amanda gives <Character Name> the <Item Name>.\par
"Y'all enjoy it, now."\par
wayb : "Some say I make the best Waybread in these parts. It costs just 2 gold. You want to try some?"\par
no-"Come back when you have some gold."\par
yes, but inventory full-"You don't have room to carry it."\par
yes-Amanda gives <Character Name> some Waybread.\par
"That'll put some meat on your bones."\par
rati : "Which of you?"\par
"Rations are 4 gold apiece. How many do you want?"\par
If inventory full : Amanda looks at <Character Name>. "You haven't got room to carry any!"\par
If not enough gold : "Come back when you have some gold."\par
If purchased : Amanda hands the rations to <Character Name>\par
If inventory kind of full : She hands <Character Name> # mutton ration/s.\par
"That's all you can carry."\par
-or- : "That's all you can afford."\par
miss,mand : "There, that's much better."\par
segg : "He's been in here a few times. He has a homesick look, he does."\par
bye : "Remember to tell your friends 'bout Miss Mandy."\par
other : "That's one on me. 'Tain't never heard o' that."\par
Caradon\par
Introduction : a paladin with a longsword on his back.\par
"Good <Time of Day>, <Gender>. How art thou?"\par
fine,well,good,okay,ok : "I am pleased to hear that. I wish I were healthy again.\par
other : "I see. I would that I were healthy again, too. But please, <Gender>. Let me tell you of my adventure."\par
name,knig : "Sir Caradon of Trinsic, at thy service."\par
job,serv : "I am a knight. Currently, though, I am recovering from a battle."\par
adve,heal,batt : "I've just come home from fighting in Yew. I fought gargoyles near the shrine."\par
shri,yew,figh : "There I was, with ten companions. Outside the Shrine of Honesty stood two gargoyles."\par
"I saw them drink from little vials right before they charged us."\par
"Large, clumsy brutes they were. They should have been easy to dispatch..."\par
"But they fought like cyclones!"\par
"My captain ordered me to go to town for help when only we two and the gargoyles were left standing."\par
"Just as I was returning with some guards, I saw the monsters throwing my friends' dead bodies onto a fire."\par
"Then the gargoyles looked up at us and fell over, both dead."\'b0\par
dead : "Yes, just like that: all of a sudden!"\par
"I only wish I could have killed them myself, for vengeance!"\par
veng : "If they had not burned his body, my captain might have been resurrected."\par
For a moment, Caradon looks ready to weep. "The beasts!"\par
beas,garg : "Monsters with eyes like coals and skin like rock."\par
bye : "Farewell, <Gender>."\par
other : "I cannot help thee with that."\par
Morchella\par
Introduction : a tough-looking woman with a walk like a troll.\par
She stares insolently at you.\par
name : "I'm Morchella."\par
job : "I be a retired sailor, that I am."\par
"Thou wert a pirate!"\par
"Well! How rude!" She turns up her nose and leaves.\par
"An honest one, mind ye."\par
pira : "I know nothing about that!" She walks off in a huff.\par
hone,sail : "That's right, me bucko. Why, I've sailed with Lord British and Captain John."\par
lord,brit : "He walks with a limp, ye know. 'Fraid of mice, too, he is."\par
capt,john : "He offered to marry me but of course I refused. Didn't want to be tied down."\par
map : She looks around furtively first. "Well, now, I might have seen the likes of that in me travels..."\par
"Tell ye what, matey:"\par
"If ye give me a shield of the Order of the Serpent, I'll tell ye where that map be at."\par
cara,lad : "I might even ask 'im to marry me." She winks slyly at you.\par
bye : "So long, matey."\par
shie,serp,magi : If didn't ask about map : Don't know what to say 'bout that, matey."\par
If given shield : "Now all I need is a magic sword; then methinks I'll be a knight."\par
If asked about map, but not given shield : "If I had a Silver Serpent shield, I'd give it to Caradon."\par
"He's a fine, brave lad, he is."\par
If asked about map and have shield : "That be quite a prize there, matey. Will ye trade it to me for a bit o' map?"\par
no-"Then leave me be!" She turns her back angrily on you and walks off.\par
yes-From a little box Morchella hands over a piece of paper. It is a piece of the pirate map.\par
"I was going to give this magic shield to Caradon, but methinks I'll keep it for meself instead!"\par
other : "Good <Time of Day>, <Gender>." She walks off.\par
de Hugh\par
Introduction : a commanding presence: a tall warrior in black armor.\par
Initial visit : He stands and bows to you.\par
"<Gender>. Art thou a warrior?"\par
no-"Then why hast thou come to Serpent's Hold?"\par
yes-"Good! I seek courageous warriors to accompany me."\par
name : "Who wants to know?"\par
"Well, `<Last Input>, I am Baron de Hugh."\par
job : "I am a mercenary now."\par
join,merc : "First I shall gather an army."\par
army,warr,acco : "I plan to build my reputation as a great fighter."\par
"My army and I will kill the mighty daemon Sin'Vraal!"\par
demo,daem,kill,sin,'vra,vraa : "He is a malevolent creature, lord over numerous servants who crawl about the desert."\par
dese : "It is on the north-eastern tip of Britannia. Look it up on a map."\par
cour : "It is foolish to be courageous unless one is backed by a well-trained force of fighters."\par
"Or unless one happens to be the Avatar, I imagine."\par
avat : "I heard at the guild that the Avatar was in town!"\par
guil,orde : "Koronada says I will be considered for membership when I have done something noteworthy."\par
"Have ye ever done aught worthy of note?"\par
no-"Well, actually, neither have I!"\par
yes-"Then surely Koronada has heard of ye. Tell him your name and he may invite ye to join the Silver Serpent guild."\par
koro : "He is firm but fair. He does not wish to see any unworthy person bear the Silver Serpent blazon."\par
silv,serp : "I believe the silver serpent is a quick and highly venomous creature."\par
blaz : "A blazon is a shield marking, such as a serpent."\par
bye : "Good luck, <Gender>."\par
other : "That I cannot help ye with."\par
Loubet\par
Introduction : a tall and dashing gentleman.\par
He greets you with an elaborate bow and flourish. "Good <Time of Day>, mon ami"\par
"'Ave you come to moi for instruction?"\par
no-"You 'ave but to ask, mah friend."\par
yes-Loubet hands you a foil and a mask of golden mesh.\par
He shows you the correct stance, then you spar for a bit.\par
"Now ze off hand, <Gender>... Mon dieu, you are (how you say it?) ambidextrous! Very good, mah friend."\par
M'sieur Loubet is a skilled teacher, and you feel like you've really learned something.\par
prac,ask,less : If already sparred : "But no! You are too skilled, I 'ave nothing more to teach you!"\par
if not at training hall : "Practice? Here? Surely you jest!"\par
"No, come to ma salle sometime, zen we will spar, yes?"\par
fenc,inst : "Oui, I teach ze fencing here in my salle, my school."\par
"Is very difficult sometimes. Most fighters, zey have no subtlety, no finesse."\par
He turns up his nose and sniffs aristocratically.\par
If sparred : "Zey are not like you, mah friend! You are most talented!"\par
If not sparred : "But you, you look much better than that, my friend."\par
"(Just ask/Come to ma salle sometime) and I'll give you a lesson!"\par
name : "I am M'sieur Loubet" "Touche!" He wields his foil casually, lunging at an imaginary target.\par
If previously asked name : "But you already know who I am, silly person!"\par
If not previously asked name : "Much pleased to meet you, madame/m'sieur"\par
touc : "Zat simply means 'touch.' In fencing we score by touching ze opponent with ze foil tip."\par
foil,tip,scor : "Zey are blunt on ze end, see?"\par
"Ze first third of ze blade (near ze 'andle) is 'forte'--strong. It is good to parry with zis part of ze sword."\par
"Ze rest of ze blade is 'foible'--weak and flexible."\par
"Ze foil, she is a very delicate thing. There must be much skill, yes?"\par
"You must 'old ze sword like a living bird:"\par
"Too loose and she flies away. Too tight and she smothers. Just right, and..."\par
"She sings very sweet!" He strikes metal and the foil makes a pleasant ringing noise.\par
nois,plea,ring,hear : "SHINGGG!\'b0"\par
job : "I am ze fencing instructor."\par
bye,au r : "Au revoir!"\par
other : "I cannot 'elp you with zat."\par
Koranada\par
Introduction : a dignified man wearing a loose jacket decorated with a serpent.\par
Subsequent visits : "It is good to see thee again, <Avatar Name>."\par
Initial visit : "Hello, adventurer"\par
"As guildmaster, I welcome thee in the name of the Order of the Silver Serpent."\par
"What is thy name?"\par
"Well met, <Gender> Avatar!"\par
name : "I am Koranada, son of Kulebra."\par
"My father was a brave lighthouse keeper."\par
job,ligh : "An earthquake destroyed the lighthouse, else I would have inherited the position of keeper in Greyhaven."\par
"I traveled to Serpent's Hold to join the Order instead."\par
orde,hold,guil : "We stand for the principle of Courage."\par
If a member : "We are honored by thy membership, worthy Avatar!"\par
If asked to join : "Acquire a Silver Serpent shield and thou wilt be admitted to the order, <Gender> <Avatar Name>."\par
If not a member : "Dost thou wish to join the Order of the Silver Serpent?"\par
cour,brav : "Go and speak to de Hugh. Observe what he believes to be courage."\par
"Though he is a fine fighter, he has yet to prove himself worthy of our order."\par
shie : "The Serpent Shield of our order is a sacred symbol of our brotherhood of bravery."\par
If have shield : "Carry it with pride!"\par
If don't have shield : "Its making is a magical process."\par
"Gherick the Smithy will help thee make one."\par
magi,proc : "'Tis secret, as well."\par
gher : "You will most likely find him at Siege Crafters."\par
join : "I have responsibilities here,<Gender>. But I am honored by the offer. \par
If not a member : "However..."\par
"Dost thou wish to join the Order of the Silver Serpent?"\par
no-"There will always be a place here for thee, <Gender>."\par
yes-"We would be greatly honored if thou wouldst join us, Avatar."\par
"Thy deeds speak well of thee, <Avatar Name>."\par
"I shall waive the usual requirements since thy adventures are more than sufficient proof of thy courage."\par
"However, thou must still create thine own shield."\par
rune : Without the meaning, such a symbol is just a meaningless scratching."\par
"We meditate on valour here."\par
mant,medi : "A mantra is a concept, a special word to be turned over and over in the mind."\par
"When we meditate on a mantra, we do so in order to find the meaning of that virtue."\par
mean : "It is not enough just to know a mantra or possess a rune."\par
"In order to be virtuous, one must act virtuously."\par
virt,avat : "Sometimes one virtue conflicts with another, though both be numbered amongst the virtues of the Avatar."\par
"The hero seeks to act with an awareness of these conflicts instead of merely following instinct."\par
"My teacher Conor taught me this."\par
cono : "A dear friend. He was guildmaster here when I was in training."\par
"He lives humbly in New Magincia now."\par
bye : "Fare thee well."\par
other : "That I cannot help thee with."\par
Sir Simon\par
Introduction : a muscular knight. He speaks in a raspy voice.\par
Initial Visit : "Good <Time of Day>, <Gender>."\par
Subsequent visits : "Greetings, <Gender> Avatar!"\par
"Thou art most welcome in my castle, Avatar." He bows deeply to you.\par
name : "Call me Simon, <Gender>."\par
job : "I am the lord of Serpent's Hold."\par
mant : "I personally favor the mantra of Valour."\par
"I taught it to the bard Culham in a song."\par
culh : "He spends much time in Jhelom, though he be a traveling bard."\par
trav : "Yes, there's no telling where one might find him."\par
"As I said, though, Jhelom is a good guess."\par
rune : "If I had a rune, I'd wear it proudly."\par
"But others fear for the safety of such important talismans, hiding them in some peculiar places."\par
"I wonder if 'tis considered theft to seize a rune laid out for all to see..."\par
bye : "Goodbye. I hope thou wilt visit me again when thou hast time, friend."\par
other : "I wish I could help thee with that, Avatar."\par
Tessa\par
Introduction : a well dressed woman.\par
Subsequent visits : "Welcome again to Serpent's Hold, Avatar!"\par
Initial visit : "Ah, <Gender> <Avatar Name>! A sailor from Britain said thou had returned to the land!"\par
"How glad I am to see that it is true!"\par
name : "I'm Tessa. We met during thy last quest, Avatar!"\par
"Strange that thou didst not recognize me."\par
"I would have hoped that the past years had not taken that much toll on me!"\par
job : "I'm the keeper of the Flame of Courage."\par
"I also help my husband Simon run this town."\par
"How fortunate we were to come here after the earthquake!"\par
husb,simo : "He is the lord of this hold."\par
flam,cour : "You'll find many courageous fighters here!"\par
eart,toll,year : "After thy last quest, there were many great earthquakes."\par
"The island of Bordermarch sank into the sea, along with our keep!"\par
"Only through great fortune did Simon and I make it off the island alive!"\par
bye : "Farewell, Avatar! Be brave in thy quest!"\par
other : "Pardon?"\par
Seggallion\par
Introduction : a huge, muscled warrior with a sad look in his eyes.\par
He looks at you imploringly.\par
"What is it?"\par
If in party : "You have a question?"\par
name : "Seggallion of...well now that won't mean anything to you."\par
If in party : "Seggallion. You can call me 'Segg' though."\par
job : "If you mean my profession, I would have to say a knight of Ashtalarea."\par
If in party : "He looks at you puzzled. "The same as yours now."\par
asht : "A land unfamiliar to you, I'm sure. Just as unfamiliar as yours is to me."\par
If in party : "Ask me again sometime. It is quite a story."\par
unfa,land : "Yes, I was walking in the mountains of Tyme when suddenly I heard a noise."\par
"It was dark and I heard this low growling."\par
"Having just been released from Pildar's clutches, I was tired and hungry."\par
tyme : "That is a great range of mountains in my land. Wherever that is now."\par
pild : "From what I hear, he is not unlike your Mondain."\par
"Anyway, I peered into the darkness but could see nothing."\par
"Suddenly a huge wall of @blue flame appeared behind me."\par
blue,flam : "Yes, blue like nothing I had seen in any spell."\par
"Anyway, just as I turned, the creature leapt from the woods."\par
"It hit me with such force, we both entered the blue flame together."\par
ente : "Well, it didn't burn us, we just fell through to the ground beyond it."\par
"After struggling for a while, I finally managed to kill it."\par
"That's when I wandered into this community."\par
comm : "The people of this land are brave and honorable."\par
"They fed and clothed me when I discovered that my gold was not the same as yours."\par
"I know it is a queer story, but true none the less."\par
quee : "Yes it is. Still, if I could I would like to join you on your quest."\par
"Perhaps one of the people in your land will know how to get me back to mine."\par
"If not, at least I can thank your people by assisting you."\par
join : "You don't look seperated to me." He laughs heartily.\par
If on boat : "Not while you're in that thing!"\par
If party full : "I wish I could, however, you seem to have enough strong arms already."\par
"If any should leave though, seek me out."\par
If join party' : He bows low. "Seggallion at your service."\par
bye : "Farewell."\par
If joined party : "Shall we be off then?"\par
other : "That's one on me. 'Tain't never heard o' that."\par
If in party : "He leans a bit closer. "What was that?"\par
leave : If not in party : "Am I standing in your light? Sorry."\par
If on boat : "Could we at least wait till we get back to shore?"\par
If leaves : "I'll leave all these things with you."\par
"It is hard to say goodbye, but I see your path leads elsewhere, so..."\par
Skara Brae\par
\par
Trenton\par
Introduction : a tall, rather well dressed man with a wilted smile.\par
"Yes?" he asks, reaching over and removing something invisible from your shoulder.\par
Subsequent visits : Recognizing you, his smile flickers a moment. "You have come back. Well?"\par
name : Subsequent times : "You've forgotten? Well, 'Your honor' will do."\par
Initial time : He sniffs the air as if smelling something bad.\par
"I am, of course, Trenton Bell, the mayor."\par
"You may call me 'Your Honor'."\par
tren,bell : "I would appreciate if you would use my title, 'Your Honor'."\par
titl : "Yes, I am mayor."\par
your,hono,mayo : "Yes?"\par
humb,floc,alar,pier,cave : "Yes."\par
mant : "Well, surely thou canst read, yes?"\par
read : "Yes, reading books is good for your spiritual side."\par
job : "Job? I do not labor like others."\par
labo,othe,sail : "You know: rigging the masts or swabbing the decks."\par
mast,rig,swab,deck : "You aren't much of a sailor are you?"\par
"Yorl and that young Delancy girl can tell you about that."\par
yorl : "He works at the pier with the Delancy girl."\par
dela,marn : "She has run the pier ever since her father, Quenton, was attacked by a gargoyle."\par
He coughs then clears his throat.\par
rune : "Quenton, not I, was in charge of its safe keeping."\par
"Just as I suspected, when he died, so too did our chances of finding the rune."\par
"You see, he never told anyone where it was located."\par
shri,moon,gate : "Speak to Horance of that."\par
"He may be mad, but he is still quick and astute in the ways of magic."\par
quen,atta : "We were not friends...not good friends, that is. He resented my position."\par
posi,rese : "Yes, well, as mayor, I am the shepherd of the spiritual people of this hamlet."\par
shep,spir,peop,haml : "We do not believe in violence as a solution to our problems."\par
"My flock would not fight against anyone."\par
"Therefore, I'm alarmed at the recent gargoyle sightings."\par
garg : "Huge fierce creatures, they are."\par
"Quenton didn't even have time to scream before one of those beasts had killed him."\par
scre : "Many believe if he had screamed, someone in the inn would have heard him."\par
inn,some,hear : "A couple of travelers were staying there that night, but they said they heard nothing."\par
"Still, I find this strange."\par
coup,trav : "I do not know their names."\par
"'Twas Gideon questioned them, not I."\par
gide : "He runs the Haunting Inn."\par
haun : "The one the travelers were at. It's across the way." He frowns at you.\par
stra : "Yes, you see, my brother is a guard for Lord British."\par
"A few months ago, a gargoyle attempted to enter the castle proper."\par
"He said that although they killed the beast, it's horrifying noises still give him nightmares."\par
nigh,nois,beas : "He keeps hearing its deep growl."\par
"I'm sure that even if Quenton couldn't scream, someone would have heard that growl."\par
deza : "She is a peaceful woman. Very pleasant to talk to."\par
hora : "For the life of me I've never understood a word he's ever said."\par
"They say he drank one too many potions."\par
mich : "He is a very private sort. I've never been to his abode."\par
"He lives east of here, along the road to Britain."\par
bye : "Goodbye."\par
other : "I fail to see how that relates to the matter at hand..."\par
-or- : "You will have to ask another of that."\par
Gideon\par
Introduction : a man bent over with age. An old brown tunic hangs loosely on him.\par
Initial visit : He looks at you, then looks over his shoulder and shouts to someone behind him.\par
"There, I told you, Marta. New people, new food for our souls."\par
He turns back to you. "Welcome to the Haunting Inn."\par
"Come and sit, for you must have many tales."\par
Subsequent visits : "Is it you, <Avatar Name>?" he says, leaning close and staring you in the eyes.\par
"Of course it is! Welcome back, traveler."\par
name : "Gideon, my friend, Gideon's what I'm called by one and all."\par
tale : "Yes, let us swap stories for a while..."\par
Gide : "Tis an old family name meaning 'one who spreads the word.'"\par
"My wife tells me I spread too many of them around."\par
lodg,room,inn : "# gold for a room and a meal. Interested?"\par
yes, no gold-I'm sorry, but we require cash in advance for our rooms.\par
yes-You sleep in a comfortable bed...\par
You wake rested and eat a large breakfast.\par
"Good morning, my friend."\par
no-Perhaps some other time, then.\par
word : "The word I spread is one of kindness to all souls!"\par
stra,bedr,drin,well,skif,race,samp,ware,odd,empt : "Yes."\par
job : "My wife would say it is to annoy the customers with idle banter. She's dear."\par
"I have rooms for let."\par
wife : "When I was a young man I visited the shrine to contemplate an emptiness I felt inside."\par
"Marta was there, so beautiful and shy."\par
"We sat in silence together for hours."\par
"Finally, she could take no more and turned and kissed me."\par
A shout comes from the room behind him.\par
He answers, "No, Marta, our guests are not asleep yet."\par
haun : "That name used to be just words."\par
"But now, with what Marta saw..."\par
shri : "The shrine of Spirituality. It is where we go when we are troubled."\par
"You should visit it sometime."\par
shou,mart,what,saw : "She hasn't come out of that room since she saw that darn ghost in the dining room a few nights ago."\par
"She told me the lanterns went out and a spectre drifted in front of her."\par
"She let out such a scream that I heard her from our bedroom."\par
He shakes his head and glances at the room behind him.\par
ghos,dini,lant,spec,scre : "My Marta doesn't spook that easy. After all, she's woke up next to me all these years."\par
"At first I thought maybe I should lock the cupboard where we keep the wine."\par
"But I don't think my Marta's been nippin'. I wish I knew what she saw."\par
cup,wine : "If you've never had Stivius' wine, you're in for a treat."\par
hora : "He's the alchemist who lives on Iver's Rounding."\par
"You'll need a boat to get there though."\par
iver,roun : "It was named after a famous pirate who beached his craft there during a storm."\par
stiv,wine : "He lives next door. Strange fellow..."\par
"I think he's sampled too much of his own wares."\par
idle,bant : "I'm sure by now you've heard such banter about old Quenton."\par
"He was a dear soul." Gideon looks past you into the distance.\par
"I could not believe it was him by the well." His eyes become watery.\par
"He lay so quiet, no sign of pain on his face, and just an amulet in his bloody hand."\par
He looks at the floor and mumbles. "Quen, I miss you, old mate."\par
quen,old,mate : "We came to this island many years ago."\par
"As children we'd take the boats and race around the point."\par
"Marta and I took care of him when Mondain's henchmen killed his wife Elisabeth."\par
"We care for his daughter, Marney, now. She's such a brave girl." He pauses a moment then continues.\par
"Neither I nor the travelers staying here heard anything the night he was killed."\par
kill : He looks at you a moment, then leans closer. "They say that Quenton was killed by a Gargoyle."\par
"I've heard these beasts eat their prey. Why did they leave Quenton alone then?"\par
mond,henc : "Yes, Quenton and Yorl were out fishing when a few of those evil ones landed here."\par
"They were fleeing Lord British's men and apparently thought our hamlet was safe haven."\par
"They went around asking for some person named Relthor, or Renthar... something like that."\par
elis : She was an angel to view. Blonde hair, green eyes, tall slender body. Marney could be her twin."\par
"I can still see Elisa's brave face as the men led her to their boat."\par
"They said that after she got them past their pursuers she would be freed." He hides his face in his hands.\par
"Our beliefs held us still."\par
"She turned and handed something to her crying little girl."\par
"Then she boarded the skiff, and they were gone."\par
marn,cryi,litt,brav,girl : "She, like her mother, is strong in her beliefs."\par
"When we buried her father, she sang a song she wrote for him." He softly sings.\par
"'You put your love in my heart, and now it's fallen apart, but all alone in the dark, I will remove the pain.'"\par
"'There is a sting in my eyes, and your name in my cries, but still I realize, that you are part of me.'"\par
boar,skif : "Elisabeth bowed her head as they sailed off." He looks absently at the floor and attempts to clear his throat.\par
Speaking again, his voice is a whisper. "They found her body along the coast south of here."\par
coas,sout : He looks at you, his eyes red and his lip quivering. He simply nods.\par
hand,some : "I couldn't see what it was."\par
relt,rent,pers : "We had no such person in this town. Not by that name."\par
beli,stil : "We are a peaceful people."\par
"We believe that all men have hearts that can possess either good or evil."\par
"These evil ones believed that by tearing down others, they could become more powerful."\par
"The truth is, when you tear down another's ladder you become no higher, they just become lower."\par
"It is harder to build your ladder on your own, but you will see farther in the end."\par
trav,murd : "I questioned them about the night of the murder."\par
"Still, of all of us, my Marta and I had the best vantage point from which to witness, or even hear, the murder."\par
"Yet we saw and heard nothing."\par
amul : "We went and told Yorl what had happened."\par
"When he returned with us to the well, he removed the amulet from Quenton's hand and took it to Marney."\par
"It took courage to tell her the news."\par
tren,bell : "He means well, it's just his attitude is all wrong for the job."\par
"He should spend some time in New Magincia."\par
new,magi : "You should sail there someday."\par
yorl : His eyes light up "He is one of the friendliest people in this hamlet."\par
"You must go see him, down by the pier." He stares absently at your shirt pocket.\par
"He's been like a father to Marney."\par
deza : "She's a dear soul. I sometimes feel sorry for her. I mean, her weight and all."\par
"Still, she is one of the most interesting people I've ever met."\par
mich : "Now there's a sad soul. He was so young when he got tangled up with the wrong group of kids."\par
"Had he been raised by someone with a good heart, he might have been one of Lord British's greatest knights."\par
lord,brit : "I'm just an innkeep. Ask Yorl: his father used to sail for our ruler."\par
bye : "Come back, dear souls."\par
other : "Ask someone else about that."\par
Stivius\par
Introduction : a tiny little man with wild eyes.\par
"Yeah. Ok. Yeah."\par
He looks you up and down and then claps his hands together. "Yeah. Ok. Yeah."\par
Subsequent visits : "Back for some more wine?"\par
Initial visit : "What can I do you for?"\par
name : "Stivius the wine merchant is mine."\par
stiv : "Quite a name, eh?"\par
job : "I make wine."\par
buy,wine,merc : "Yeah. Maybe you want to buy some."\par
"Which of you?"\par
"Which item?"\par
<NPC Name> smiles at <Character Name>. "For <Item Name> it will cost you # gold. Interested?"\par
yes, but full-"You look pretty full to me."\par
yes-"Excellent!" After accepting <Character Name>'s gold, <NPC Name> hands over the wine.\par
"Enjoy your <Item Name>."\par
yes, but no gold-<NPC Name> looks at <Character Name>. "You don't have enough gold."\par
no-"Too bad, it's really good wine."\par
ghos : "It's not just a tale you've been hearing."\par
tale : "Everyone knows that Quenton haunts this town."\par
"If I had been murdered by those evil ones...but that's just gossip."\par
ones,murd : "It was late one night and I had just returned from my fields."\par
"'Course my path takes me right by Gideon's garden."\par
"I heard a noise by the well and saw some dark forms hunched there."\par
"They had huge wings and evil red eyes."\par
"I ran like the wind to my doorway. I was sure I was dead."\par
quen : "He was a nice enough soul. I sold many bottles to him."\par
gide,gard : "Gideon runs the Haunting Inn."\par
"His wife has a garden which you can see from my front door."\par
haun,inn : "It's the Inn straight across the lane from here."\par
wife : "She doesn't do much. Helps him run the place."\par
nois : "Twas a strange whispering, in a tongue I could not understand."\par
stra,whis,tong : "It didn't sound like any language I ever heard."\par
"More like one o' them guild languages."\par
guil,lang : "Like the one the alchemist speaks."\par
alch : "Go ask old Horance. He can tell ya - if you can understand him!"\par
hora : "He lives over on Ivers Rounding by himself.\par
iver,roun : "You must be new to this village."\par
"Go see @Marney, she'll get you there."\par
marn : "She's the daughter of Quenton - the ghost."\par
dark,form : "I couldn't see too clearly. They were about man-sized though."\par
man,size : "Yes, but they were hunched down so it was hard to see them."\par
huge,wing,evil,red,eyes : His eyes widen. "Gargoyles they were!"\par
"Must'a been ten or twelve of 'em."\par
ten,twel : "Well, perhaps more like two or three."\par
"I didn't stay around and count 'em."\par
garg : "Yes. Big, ugly, snarling beasts."\par
"'Course, they were kneeling when I saw 'em."\par
knee : "You know, on their knees."\par
tren,bell : "I don't care much for him. He's always trying to get me to sell him my wine cheaper."\par
deza : "She's my sweetie."\par
He clasps his hands next to his cheek. "I count the hours until I can see her."\par
mich : "I have never talked to him. He bought wine from me once but that's it."\par
lord,brit : "Well, what's to say? I am glad he is again our ruler."\par
bye : "Come back if you get thirsty."\par
other : "Ask someone else about that."\par
Marta\par
Introduction : a rather plump woman with darting eyes.\par
Initial visit : "Hello. How are you this <Time of Day>?"\par
Subsequent visits : Hello again. Are you well <Time of Day>?"\par
"What is it you need?"\par
name : "Marta."\par
mart : "It is a plain name, but I must live with it."\par
job : "Oh dear, my husband runs the inn. I tend my garden."\par
gard : "You've not seen it? I have the loveliest roses."\par
rose : "Red as the evening sun on the sea."\par
yorl : "He's a messy person - and smelly too."\par
dela,marn : "My dear little one? She is an angel - well minded, kind, thoughtful."\par
"She's a dear."\par
garg : "Nasty creatures, or so I hear. Can stomp a garden to pieces in minutes."\par
gide : "My husband talks a bit too much, but I love him."\par
haun : "I want to move from this house as soon as we can."\par
deza : "I cut myself one time in the garden. She healed it."\par
hora : "Another strange man. We have so many here."\par
mich : "He never comes into town."\par
ghos : "It was the scariest thing I ever saw! I'm sure it's still lurking about somewhere..."\par
bye : "Goodbye."\par
other : "You will have to ask another that."\par
Yorl\par
Introduction : a huge, imposing man adorned in a leather apron.\par
Subsequent visits : "Good <Time of Day>, friend." He extends a huge hand which resembles a slab of meat.\par
Initial visit : "Ah!" He rumbles up to you with a large, bloody hook.\par
You feel like bolting, but then he drops it in a pocket on his apron and extends a bloody hand.\par
He smells strongly of fish.\par
"What do ya need?"\par
name : "Yorl. A short name, but a strong one!"\par
yorl,stro : "My father was a coastal raider."\par
"But don't let that out."\par
He lets out a holler and laughs loudly.\par
coas,raid : He suddenly stops laughing and looks at you, his eyes angry and wide.\par
"Who told you?"\par
With that he throws his head back and laughs again.\par
fath : "Yes, I had one." He hollers again, this time slapping you on the back.\par
job : "I'm a fisherman."\par
"'Tisn't quite as exciting as some jobs, but it keeps me near the sea."\par
sea : "Oh, aye, love the sea I do."\par
"Even if the fishing's been poor of late."\par
fish,buy,sell : "Fish come, fish go. Right now, the fish have gone."\par
"But they'll come back!"\par
"And when they do, I'll be waitin' for 'em with my nets!"\par
net : "Aye, you haveta use nets to do serious fishing."\par
"A pole'll never catch you enough to sell."\par
pole : "Never use 'em myself. I stick to nets--faster and easier."\par
"Man's gotta make a living!"\par
ghos : "That's a tale they tell in town. I've seen no spirits. Except at old Stivius'."\par
tale : "You know, 'bout Marn's pa haunting the vineyard."\par
He leans closer wiping his hands on his apron.\par
"I think Stivius has been drinkin' his profits."\par
amul,lock : "I took it from Quenton's dead body to give to Marney for safe keeping."\par
marn : "She's the loveliest thing ever seen in these parts."\par
"I'm her father now. And if any man should want her hand, he'd better be able to take me square!"\par
He gives you a huge grin and flexes a massive bicep.\par
vine : "They say that Quen's ghost haunts that area of town."\par
"I can't imagine why. The sea was his lifeblood."\par
stiv : He removes a large hook from his pocket and begins to clean it as he talks.\par
"He's a strange little guy. They say he's the only one who saw Quen murdered."\par
"I wish we'd had a better witness." He flips the hook over and over examining it.\par
"Still, those Gargoyles would frighten any man."\par
"'Specially one as small as him."\par
quen : He pauses for a moment and looks distantly past your shoulder.\par
"He and I were mates. I can still remember the moment they told me he was dead."\par
He swallows hard and his eyes become glassy. "I miss old Quen."\par
they : "Gideon and Stivius."\par
"They came to my house before dawn and told me that Quen had been killed by gargoyles."\par
gide : "He owns the Haunting Inn. He's good people, though his wife is a bit of a nag."\par
wife : "She always complains that my house is an eyesore."\par
"I tell you if she comes around here, I'll show her what an eyesore really is!"\par
He slaps you on the back and laughs.\par
eye,sore : "This is a fishhouse. It's meant to be an eyesore." He laughs again.\par
garg : "I never seen a one."\par
"I seen alot o' things out at sea, serpents as big as the biggest four-master."\par
"But 'nary a single gargoyle." He looks out towards the sea.\par
four,mast : "One o' the tall ships. My father used to pilot one o' the biggest in Lord British's fleet."\par
"The Merideth Ann. She was a sight to behold, she was."\par
Meri,Ann : "She'd seen many a battle with pirates. Then she went to her grave in a storm."\par
"Took nearly two hundred men with her."\par
grav,stor : "Came up all of a sudden. I say it was Mondain's doing."\par
He pulls the pipe from his mouth and tamps the tobacco with his stout thumb.\par
"Anyhow, that's when I lost my father."\par
mond : He stops trying to relight his pipe and looks at you.\par
"Where have you been scuttled? That's too long a story for this <Time of Day>."\par
scut : "Never mind." He sticks his hands in his apron.\par
serp : He turns his head back towards you, purses his lips, then speaks.\par
"It was a calm night, it was."\par
"Quen and I had 'cided to go out on that glassy sea for a fish."\par
"Not just any fish, mind ya, a light-horn."\par
He pulls a pipe out of his apron.\par
ligh,horn : "When we were boys, Quen's father often talked about such a fish."\par
"Said if a body could catch one, good fortune would be his."\par
He brings the pipe to his lips and lights it.\par
catc,good,fort : "Yes, good fortune."\par
"He said the fish had a glowing horn on it's snout."\par
"It only comes close to the surface when the sea is like glass."\par
surf,glas : "You see, the fish thought the surface was a mirror and it came up to admire its horn." \par
He chuckles to himself, teeth clenched around the pipe. \par
"Anyway, Quen and I 'cided we'd catch us one in our skiff."\par
skif : He pulls the pipe from his mouth and blows some smoke rings. \par
"Well, even though the skiff was small, we figured that we'd spear the beast and drag it back to port."\par
drag,port,spea : "I know it sounds crazy now, but you have to remember, we were only boys."\par
"Anyway, we rowed out past Ivers Rounding and sat in our skiff waiting to see one."\par
He looks out to sea again and chuckles.\par
iver,roun : "You know, past where the alchemist lives."\par
"Anyway, we sat there for hours with 'nary a sign of life..."\par
"Then, suddenly, in the distance we could see a tall neck rising out of the water and heading towards us."\par
alch,hora : "Old Horance? He's a crazy old coot who lives on the isle."\par
tall,neck : "As it came closer, a huge wave preceded it and we could make out a giant mouth."\par
He takes his pipe from his mouth and gestures at you.\par
"I tell you, you've never seen two boys make a skiff travel so fast in all your life."\par
He laughs out loud, this time bending over to support himself.\par
tren,bell : "He's a stuffy one. Never likes to come down here, says it smells."\par
deza : "She's a heavily rigged one, she is." He winks at you and laughs.\par
mich : "I don't much care for that one. He used to be one of Mondain's henchmen."\par
"I'd plot a course 'round him if I were you."\par
lord,brit : "My father used to sail in one of his fleets. A brave and mighty ruler he is."\par
bye : He slaps a hand on your back "Good fortune, and may the wind be at your back."\par
other : "That doesn't concern me. Ask another."\par
Dezana\par
Introduction : a very large woman with a deliberate smile.\par
Initial visit : "Dezana knows much. Have you returned for more talk or are you in need?"\par
Subsequent visits : "Mmm...yes?" She looks down at you, her eyes merely slits.\par
name : "Dezana." She smiles like a cat preparing for a meal.\par
job : "I can heal, cure, and even resurrect."\par
need : "Yes? What is thy need--healing, curing or resurrection?"\par
heal : Avatar healthy : "You look fine to me."\par
Party healthy : "None of you look hurt!"\par
Injured : "Which of you?"\par
"I see thy injury, <Character Name>."\par
"It will cost you 30 gold, interested?"\par
no-<NPC Name> approaches <Character Name> and binds the wounds.\par
yes-"You must pay before I can heal you."\par
"Is there something else I can do for you?"\par
cure : Avatar healthy : "You don't look poisoned."\par
Party healthy : "Perhaps you have a hangover, 'cause none of you are poisoned."\par
Poisoned : "Which of you?"\par
"You look poisoned to me." She nods at <Character Name>.\par
"It'll cost you 10 gold, interested?"\par
yes-<NPC Name> grabs a vial and pours it down <Character Name>'s throat.\par
<Character Name> feels much better.\par
resu : No corpse : "What? But you carry no dead body!"\par
Have corpse : "I see that <Character Name> carries a departed friend."\par
"Resurrection costs 400 gold, interested?"\par
no-"As you wish."\par
yes, no gold-"You don't have enough gold."\par
"You might think about a proper burial."\par
yes, group gold-Your party takes up a collection for their fallen comrade.\par
<NPC Name> lays hands upon the corpse...\par
"Doman..."\par
"thixus..."\par
"anretu!"\par
And the dead live again!\par
If have another corpse : "I see that <Character Name> carries another slain friend."\par
deza : "That is correct. Now, are you here to chat, or are you in need?"\par
talk,conv,chat : "There are many words which travel about this small hamlet."\par
"Many are intriguing, some are even dangerous. What words have you heard?"\par
ghos : "That is one worth speaking about. You see, many people travel the spirit world."\par
"Some are lost souls, others have a purpose. Quenton is not a lost soul."\par
trav,spir,worl : "It is a mystical place between here and the hereafter. Quenton resides there."\par
lost,soul : "They spent their whole life without learning anything or growing inside."\par
"They are as children left alone in a crib. Never learning, always seeking."\par
quen : "He had attained much wisdom before he was forced from here."\par
"If his ghost has been seen..."\par
"And I believe he has..."\par
"Then he must be attempting to communicate with us about some unfinished business."\par
"Perhaps he knows who killed him."\par
kill,comm : "I know this much: if you wish to find out who murdered him, you won't be able to ask his ghost."\par
"You see, the spirit world can not communicate with ours directly."\par
"Although his ghost can hear your questions, he'll respond by manipulating the environment."\par
mani,envi : "Yes, you know, make him demonstrate his answers by, say, shaking a branch."\par
garg : "Those creatures are dangerous. I have heard that they can tear a man to pieces."\par
"So why, then, did the gargoyles not attack Stivius as well?"\par
"Certainly he would have tasted just as good."\par
tren,bell : "He is a very stiff man. I believe he may be hiding something about his past."\par
yorl : "A nice fellow, but a bit too simple for me."\par
mich : "I know something about everyone in this village. However, this man is unknown to me."\par
"He never talks about his past."\par
gide : "He is a dear old man. Never has a mean thing to say of anyone."\par
stiv : "A quaint little man. He has strong feelings for me." "I must admit, he has a cute way about him."\par
marn : "She has seen much pain in her life. More than even I can heal. I pity her."\par
hora : "He was once a great man. Discovered many of the herbs I use in healing."\par
"He discovered something else, however: that total knowledge can corrupt totally."\par
"I don't know what drove him mad. And I don't want to know." She shudders slightly.\par
bye : "Return when you need healing."\par
other : "It is not my place to talk about that."\par
Horance\par
Introduction : a bent, aging man with a scraggly beard and few teeth.\par
Subsequent visits : "Once they came for wanting,\par
Twice they came to see,\par
If I am relenting,\par
In my mystery."\par
Initial visit : "Dogs are at my doorstep,\par
Yapping at my heels.\par
No way to ignore them.\par
Just pretend that they are eels."\par
buy,reag : The mention of business brings the senile man to his senses momentarily.\par
"Which of you?"\par
"Which of these?"\par
<Item Name> costs # per portion."\par
"How many dost thou want?"\par
Have enough gold : <NPC Name> hands <Character Name> the <Item Name>.\par
Not enough space : "Thou cannot carry that much!"\par
"I'll give thee #; thou dost not need the rest."\par
No space : "Thou cannot carry any <Item Name>!"\par
Not enough gold : "Thou cannot afford that much!"\par
"I'll give thee #; thou cannot have the rest."\par
No gold : "Thou cannot afford any <Item Name>!"\par
lear,spel : The mention of business brings the senile man to his senses momentarily.\par
If no spellbook, solo : "But thou hast not a spellbook!"\par
If no spellbook, party : "But none of you has a spellbook!"\par
If have spellbook : "Which of you?"\par
"In which Circle does <Character Name> wish to study?"\par
If not 1-8 : "As everybody knows, there are only eight circles."\par
Level higher than character : "I sense that <Character Name> is only ready for the # Circle."\par
"But such matters are not my concern..."\par
If no spells available : "I have no spells of that circle."\par
"Which of these?"\par
"That spell costs # gold. Interested?"\par
no-"Perhaps <Character Name> is not ready for this circle."\par
yes-<NPC Name> hands <Character Name> a piece of rune-covered parchment.\par
yes, no gold-"<Character Name> lacks the # gold required."\par
magi,book,sell : The mention of business brings the senile man to his senses momentarily.\par
"Which of you?"\par
No space : "But thou cannot carry a spellbook!"\par
Not enough gold : "But thou cannot afford a spellbook!"\par
"A spellbook costs 50 gold pieces. Interested?"\par
no-"Perhaps one of thy friends then."\par
yes-\par
name : "Names I'm always thinking,\par
Names I always see.\par
Have you any inkling\par
What they seem to mean?"\par
job : "I have nice reagents,\par
Also wondrous spells.\par
If you need a magic book,\par
Those I also sell."\par
hora,tubl : "That is too familiar,\par
Could it be a friend?\par
No, none is delivered,\par
So I must pretend."\par
kill,murd : "'Step into my parlor,'\par
Said the spider to the fly.\par
Perhaps if he could holler,\par
He would not have to die."\par
relt,rent : "Many are pretenders,\par
A harmless game they play.\par
But for the few offenders,\par
Of constant night they pray."\par
ghos : He purses his lips and lets out an eery, high-pitched cry.\par
"That is my impression.\par
Tell me what you think.\par
Can you learn a lesson,\par
From what it has to teach?"\par
burm,shav : "Don't stick your arm\par
Out too far.\par
It may go home\par
In another car!"\par
-- Burma Shave.\par
quen : "Ask about a traitor,\par
Ask about a love,\par
And if you are creative,\par
Ask above the dove."\par
garg : "What is truly fearsome,\par
What can evil be?\par
Not all that growls is gruesome,\par
Not all that hates has wings."\par
moon,gate,shri : "Through a glowing door,\par
By the full moons' light.\par
For me to tell you more\par
Would take us half the night!"\par
tren,bell : "He who has opinions,\par
Thinks he knows it all,\par
Will someday end up learning\par
What comes before a fall."\par
yorl : "Simple has its moment\par
And often is received\par
Much better than the brilliant,\par
Who often will deceive."\par
mich : "Pain can run so deeply\par
That one becomes a mute,\par
In fear of leading others\par
Where goodness is in dispute."\par
gide : "Kindness is a proverb\par
That all can understand,\par
And those who share it with you\par
Will oft be in demand."\par
stiv : "Little is the difference,\par
That seperates ourselves.\par
Remembering this inference,\par
Is oft a great challenge."\par
marn : "Love has many rivers,\par
Yet grief can twist them all.\par
Be guided by your wisdom,\par
And you'll achieve the goal."\par
lord,brit : "A council has a purpose,\par
And yet it can be wrong.\par
There are no notes that singly\par
Put the melody in a song."\par
bye : "I see that they are going,\par
I'm sure they will return.\par
For if they lack the knowing,\par
They'll always need to learn."\par
other : "I hear you have a question.\par
I'm here to answer some.\par
If I may make suggestions,\par
Please ask another one."\par
Marney\par
Introduction : a tall, delicate looking female. Her smile puts you at ease.\par
Initial visit : "Hello <Gender>, welcome to my home."\par
Her eyes are as blue as the ocean and her movements as rythmic as the tide.\par
Subsequent visits : "I recognize you from before." She winks at you.\par
"What can I do for you?"\par
name : "My father chose an ancient word for my name."\par
"It means the cool breeze after a storm has passed. Marney."\par
job : "I look after the dock."\par
dock,skif : "Oh, you're probably wanting a skiff to get out to old Horance's island."\par
"Well, we have none for sale, but feel free to borrow the one at the dock."\par
"Be sure to return it, though!"\par
marn : "It is in a poem my mother wrote to him when they first met."\par
She grabs a locket that hangs around her neck and opens it.\par
Inside is a folded piece of cloth with words printed on it. She begins to read.\par
"At first we met and dark clouds gathered, the thunder sounding your approach."\par
"Then comes the storm of our hearts pounding and in the end the marney's touch."\par
poem : "Certainly you can look at it." She hands the tiny cloth to you.\par
Looking at it, you discover that she has read only the first verse of the poem.\par
The second reads, "If I should leave and you are lonely,\par
Remember where my love is kept:\par
Inside a basket made of promise,\par
You'll find my dreams of us have slept."\par
bask : "A basket? I have one in my hope chest. Feel free to look for yourself."\par
lock,amul : "My mother gave me this just before she was taken by those evil men."\par
"My mother told me to give it to father when he returned from the sea."\par
"Yorl gave it back to me after he was killed.\par
sea : "My father had gone out to help Yorl bring in the catch that afternoon."\par
rune : "I am sorry for our town. You see, my father was the caretaker of the rune stone."\par
"After he died, we had no way of finding out where he put it."\par
ghos : She bows her head a moment and with a shaky voice begins to speak.\par
"It is something I care not to talk about. His memory brings only sadness to me."\par
quen,fath : "My father? He was a brave man and very strong."\par
"That he died in such a violent way was so wrong."\par
"But I am sure there is a reason for it."\par
Her blue eyes glisten with new-formed tears.\par
murd,kill,die : She rubs her nose with the knuckle of her hand.\par
"I can not see why those beasts would kill him, but perhaps it was just unfortunate."\par
"Still, I can't see why he was at the inn that late."\par
"Had he been drinking, Yorl would have been with him."\par
yorl : "Oh, Yorl." She smiles to herself. "He and father were never apart."\par
"After my mother was kidnapped, Yorl helped my father get back on his feet."\par
"They were always together." Her gaze returns to you.\par
"If my father had been drinking at the inn, Yorl would have been there."\par
haun,inn : "My father and Yorl would go there after a good catch."\par
"Gideon had been a friend of theirs since youth."\par
"The three would would drink and reminisce together."\par
garg,beas : She looks at you and swallows. "I cannot talk about these creatures."\par
tren,bell : "I believe he has done all he can for me."\par
"When my father was murdered, he took charge to find the gargoyles."\par
"None were found though."\par
mich : Her eyes brighten at the mention of his name. "He is a very handsome man."\par
"I see him only occasionally when he comes into town."\par
She looks absently out the window. "Yorl would never let me see him though."\par
gide : "He and his wife are very kind to me. They have taught me so much about how to treat others."\par
stiv : "He is a sweet little man. He brought me wine on my sixteenth birthday."\par
"I'm quite fond of him."\par
deza : "She has done as much as she can to heal my wounded heart."\par
"She bakes for me and we have long talks about almost everything."\par
"I wish I were as beautiful as she."\par
hora : "Ah, now, Horance is much wiser than most know."\par
"He is also my mentor when it comes to poetry."\par
"He has a way of reminding me that I am too concerned with myself."\par
"It is a gentle way, but a firm reminder."\par
lord,brit : "I saw him once when I was a little girl."\par
"We had gone to his castle for a celebration and there he sat on a great white charger."\par
"What a sight he was."\par
bye : "I am sorry that I wept. It is not your fault. Goodbye."\par
other : As you ask this, she begins to cry.Gathering her strength she looks at you. "Sorry?"\par
Michael\par
Introduction : a tall man with muscles looking like huge snakes.\par
"Speak," he growls at you, his voice as rough and cold as stone.\par
name : "Are you taking a census?" His powerful gaze is fixed on you.\par
cens : "Yes, you know, counting people, taking down names..."\par
mich : "That name is given to friends so that they may feel they are close to me."\par
"Since I have none, refrain from its use."\par
ghos : "That is a concern of the town, not mine."\par
quen : "He was not fortunate. It is written that it is better to be fortunate than skilled."\par
"He, I'm sure, would agree." His face betrays a slight grin.\par
murd,kill : "All men have enemies. A debt needed to be settled."\par
"He hadn't the strength to settle it, so someone decided to take the initiative."\par
He pulls out a knife and begins to pick at his nails.\par
debt,sett : "Surely you don't buy the fable of the gargoyle."\par
"There wouldn't be enough left to bury if this were the case."\par
"This was no monster who settled the debt, it was the work of man's hands."\par
He brings the knife to his teeth and delicately works it between them.\par
garg : "Have you ever seen one?"\par
"If you had you would not believe the fairy tales "being told by that incompetent mayor."\par
He grabs the knife and holds it aloft. "See this blade?"\par
"Their fangs are twice as long and thrice as sharp."\par
tren,bell,inco,mayo : "He is a fool. The perfect man for his job."\par
yorl : "I don't know him."\par
gide : "Too kind for his own good."\par
stiv : "An annoying little man. Makes good wine though."\par
marn : "She is kind to me, and yet I believe this is genuine."\par
hora : "Perhaps the wisest of us all."\par
lord,brit : "He is one to be respected. I have seen him fight, firsthand."\par
"He is a mighty warrior, as well as a just opponent."\par
bye : He resumes cleaning his nails with his knife.\par
other : He ignores the question and you think it wise not to ask again.\par
Quenton\par
Introduction : a vaporous form hovering before you.\par
A shiver runs up your spine as you feel a chilling draft...\par
Initial visit : The form is that of a man.\par
His mouth moves, yet no words can be heard...\par
murd,kill,die,dead : You speak the word and the spectre responds by pointing a boney hand to his eye.\par
eye : A wind from behind blows your hair, covering your eyes.\par
garg : A whirlpool of leaves, twigs and stones whips up around you.\par
Your clothing is yanked by the strong wind forcing you to grip it tightly in your hands.\par
marn : A cool breeze blows through your hair.\par
You suddenly smell the scent of a storm approaching.\par
how : The ghostly image shimmers for a moment and then he points a boney finger to his neck.\par
who : The spectre's arm thrusts out, pointing to the sea.\par
sea : The spectre's arm thrusts again, this time.\par
This time you see it points towards the pier.\par
bye : A strong breeze suddenly assaults you with twigs and leaves.\par
other : You hear no answer save the rustle of the leaves on the ground around you.\par
Stonegate\par
\par
Papa\par
Introduction : a huge male cyclops.\par
Subsequent visits : "Hoh, hoh. You back!"\par
If brought fish : "You bring good fish."\par
"Bring more?"\par
no-"No fish?" The cyclops seems sad.\par
yes-"Hoh! You bring fish?"\par
yes, but no fish-"Get fish!"\par
Initial visit : "Who you?"\par
name : "Me cyclops."\par
"Tiny one say me 'Papa.'"\par
tiny,one : "Find him on shore."\par
"One-eye little one die long ago."\par
"Female want little one, so keep tiny one."\par
"Not strong like one-eye little one."\par
job : "Live here! Eat, hunt!"\par
cell : "Cellar no go. Locked."\par
lock,key : If cyclops has key : "Got key. Want key?"\par
yes-"Want fish!"\par
"Use pole, get fish."\par
"Want key, bring fish!"\par
no-"Why ask no want?"\par
Subsequent times, no fish : "Where fish? No smell fish."\par
Subsequent times, have fish : "Good fish! Good friend!"\par
Subsequent times, no key, have fish : "Good fish! Here, key."\par
The cyclops hands you a large, rusted key.\par
If cyclops doesn't have key : "No got key."\par
big,bloc,blac,cube : "Mine. In cellar. No get!"\par
fish : "Fish good."\par
"Like eat much fish!"\par
bye : "Come back, bring more \'a2fish!"\par
other : "What mean <Last Input>?"\par
Mama\par
Introduction : a huge female cyclops.\par
Subsequent visits : "You come back! Play with tiny one?"\par
yes-"Good, he need tiny friends!"\par
no-"But he need tiny friends! He get lonely!"\par
Initial visit : "Oh, you cute! You funny-looking like tiny one!"\par
name : "Me cyclops."\par
"Tiny one say me 'Mama.'"\par
tiny,one : "Male find him on shore."\par
"One-eye little one die long ago."\par
"Two-eye little one just as good!"\par
job : "Live here! Cook, hunt!"\par
cell : "Cellar no go. Deep deep deep. Locked."\par
vort : "What look like?"\par
cube : "What color?"\par
blac : "Oh, me seen that! Big black block!"\par
lock,key : "Talk male. He have key."\par
bloc : "Male keep that in cellar."\par
bye : "Come back soon, play with tiny one more!"\par
other : "What mean <Last Input>?"\par
Myles\par
Introduction : a young human child.\par
Subsequent visits : "Hi again!"\par
Initial visit : "Wow! Two-eyed people like me! You gotta go see my folks!"\par
name : I'm Myles."\par
"But Mama and Papa aren't good with names."\par
"They just call me 'tiny one!'"\par
mama,papa,folk : "They're not my real parents."\par
"Mama and Papa found me on the beach."\par
"I guess my real parents drowned or something."\par
"That was long ago. I don't remember much about it."\par
"Mama and Papa said they used to have a son of their own, but he died."\par
"So they adopted me!"\par
adop : "We all live in that big old castle!"\par
"It's a real neat place, with all sorts of rooms and cellars and stairs and stuff."\par
room,cell : "A lot of places are locked. Papa keeps the keys."\par
job : "Oh, I help Mama and Papa!"\par
"Though sometimes I think Papa wishes I were big and strong like a cyclops, so I could help more."\par
vort,cube,bloc,blac,big,ston,stuf : "There's a whole lot of junk lying around the castle."\par
"Ask Mama or Papa about it."\par
"Papa doesn't let me play with much of it."\par
bye : "See you later!"\par
other : "Huh?"\par
Trinsic\par
\par
Sandy\par
Introduction : a shifty-eyed man with a strange smile. He smells of rancid grease and cooking smoke.\par
"Hello there, <Gender>."\par
If have egg : "That big, carefully wrapped bundle could only be a dragon's egg!"\par
"Will you give it to me?"\par
no-"I guess I cannot help you much, then."\par
yes-"Now I can make Humble Pie!" Overjoyed, he gives you a hug.\par
"So, does the subject of pirates interest you?"\par
no-He shrugs. "As you wish."\par
yes-"Well, first, there is one in Serpent's Hold. I cannot recall her name, but she has a piece of the map with her."\par
"Second, there is one on Dagger Isle. A hermit."\par
"Third, I know of a pirate at Empath Abbey, or thereabouts. Nathaniel Moorehead was his name."\par
"The fourth... but then maybe I've said too much already."\'b0\par
name : "My name is Sandstone Angus."\par
"Most folks call me Sandy."\par
job : "I cook for Lord Whitsaber."\par
"He especially likes my recipe for fish in a white wine sauce."\par
fish,wine,sauc : "It's my specialty!"\par
four,said,much,alre : "Before Lord Whitsaber came to Trinsic to be our mayor, he had another job..."\par
"As first mate to Captain Hawkins himself! His real name is Alastor Gordon."\par
map,lord,whit,map,pira : Didn't give egg : "Hmmm. I'd better get back to cooking... Excuse me."\par
He walks away mumbling, "Magincian pastry..."\par
pie,magi,past : If gave egg : "Truly it shall be a magnificent desert!"\par
If didn't give egg : "I could do you a favor if you did one for me first."\par
egg : "Only a dragon's will do."\par
drag : "There's a lair in the dungeon Destard, to the northwest."\par
"It's not far."\par
bye : "Bye."\par
favo,firs : "Let's see..."\par
"'A golden orb on a crystal sea, in a box sans hinges, lid, or key.'"\par
"I'll give you one guess to this riddle."\par
egg : "Very good!"\par
other : "It's an egg, of course."\par
"To make Magincian pastry, I require one dragon's egg."\'b0\par
other : "Sorry, I can't help you with that."\par
Whitsaber\par
Introduction : a balding but distinguished man.\par
If know identity : Recognizing you, fear fills the former pirate's eyes.\par
"What do you want? I thought we had a deal!"\par
Subsequent visits : "Welcome back, Avatar!"\par
Initial visit : "Welcome, Avatar!"\par
name : "I am Lord Whitsaber, mayor of this honorable town!"\par
job : "I am entrusted with an honor above all others-that of governing Trinsic, the Town of Honor!"\par
trin,town,hono : "Every citizen of this fine town strives every day to be a living example of honor."\par
"Of course, thy own example guides us all, Avatar!"\par
map,ship,hawk,capt,home : If have map : "I gave you the map. What more do you want?"\par
If don't have map : "All right! If thou wouldst but promise to keep my secret, I'll give thee the map!"\par
"Agreed?"\par
yes-"Oh, thank you, Avatar."\par
He hands over his piece of the map.\par
"I'll rely on thy honor to keep my secret."\'b0\par
no-But what more can I do? I cannot change the past!"\par
"By giving you the map, do I not prove that I have changed my ways?"\par
"No pirate would willingly give up the key to such a treasure!"\par
If don't know identity : "What are you insinuating?"\par
pira : "Me, a pirate? Absurd!"\par
He laughs out loud...but you sense a trace of fear in his voice!\par
sand,alas,gord,firs,mate : "Wh--what did Sandy tell you?"\par
"Did he say I was once a pirate?"\par
yes-"Then all is lost!"\par
"Have pity, Avatar, and keep my secret!"\par
"I have changed since those dark days, truly I have!"\par
no-He seems strangely relieved. "Oh. Well, good, because it isn't true!"\par
rune : "The Rune of Honor? Why, it is on a pedestal in the center of town!"\par
"Even though the rune is our most prized possession, we do not guard it!"\par
"And dost thou know why not?"\par
yes"Oh." He seems disappointed somehow.\par
no-"Because Trinsic is the Town of Honor!"\par
"None here would be dishonorable enough to steal it."\par
"And surely, if any took the rune, they would do the honorable thing and return it afterwards!"\par
mant : "The Mantra of Honor? Let me think..."\par
"Oh yes, I remember now. It's 'summ.'"\par
bye : If know identity : "Goodbye, Avatar! Thou hast my thanks!"\par
"Truly are thy compassion and honor an example to us all!"\par
If don't know identity : "Good <Time of Day>, Avatar. Return again when thou hast more time to chat!"\par
other : "I beg thy pardon, Avatar?"\par
Lawrence\par
Introduction : a small, fussy looking man.\par
"Welcome to the Fool's Pair o' Dice."\par
Subsequent visits : "Anything else I can do for you?"\par
name : "It's Lawrence."\par
buy : "Which, grapes, ale, mead, wine, or rations?"\par
job : "I sell grapes, ale, mead, wine, and rations."\par
grap : "Which of you?"\par
"That'll be 3 gold, okay?"\par
yes, no gold-"Come back when you have some gold."\par
yes, no room-"You don't have room to carry them."\par
yes-<NPC Name> gives <Character Name> some grapes.\par
no-\par
mead,ale,wine : "Which of you?"\par
"That's # gold, okay?"\par
yes, no gold-"Come back when you have some gold."\par
yes, no room-"You don't have room to carry it."\par
yes-<NPC Name> gives <Character Name> some <Item Name>.\par
"That ought to hold you."\par
no'-\par
rati : "Which of you?"\par
"Rations are 4 gold apiece. How many do you want?"\par
Pack full : <NPC Name> looks at <Character Name>. "You haven't any room in your pack."\par
No gold : "Come back when you have some gold."\par
Can afford/carry requet : <NPC Name> hands the rations to <Character Name>.\par
Can't afford/carry request : He hands <Character Name> # ration(s) of mutton.\par
Inventory full : "That's all you can carry."\par
Short on gold : "That's all you can afford."\par
no,bye : "Goodbye."\par
other : "I can't help you with that."\par
Harold\par
Introduction : a tall, muscular man with a solemn look on his face.\par
"Welcome, <Gender>."\par
"What can I do for you?"\par
name : "My name is Harold."\par
buy,hors,shoe : "Which of you?"\par
"It'll cost you 2 gold for the horseshoes, interested?"\par
yes, full-"You look pretty full to me."\par
yes-"Here you go."\par
yes, no gold-"Best check your coinpouch again."\par
no-"Very well."\par
job : "Horseshoes are my living."\par
bye : "Farewell."\par
other : "I can't help you with that."\par
Brandon\par
Introduction : a golden-haired young man.\par
Subsequent visits "Avatar! Good <Time of Day>, <Gender>! How has thy quest gone?"\par
Initial visit : "Hey! The Avatar! Good <Time of Day>, <Gender>!" "You've come to me to aid thee in thy quest! What an honor!"\par
"What else can I do for thee?"\par
buy : I have a large inventory, so be more specific:"\par
"Dost thou want arms or armor?"\par
arms, armo : Shop closed : "Come by my shop when I'm open!"\par
Shop open : "Which of you?"\par
No character selected : "Changed your mind, eh?"\par
Character selected : "That <Item Name> costs # gold."\par
"Interested?"\par
yes, full-But 'twould make thee o'erburdened, <Character Name>!"\par
yes-"Excellent!"\par
After accepting <Character Name>'s gold, <NPC Name> hands over the <Item Name>.\par
yes, no gold-"But thou hast not enough gold, <Character Name>!"\par
no-\par
sell : Shop closed : "Come by my shop when I'm open!"\par
Shop open : Nothing of interest : "Sorry, none of you has anything I need."\par
Have weapons/armour : "Aye, <Character Name> has something of interest..."\par
"Which of you?"\par
"Which item?"\par
"Will you take # gold for that <Item Name>, <Character Name>?"\par
no, only one item-"Perhaps some other time, then."\par
no, many items-"Perhaps something else then?"\par
yes-"Done!" <NPC Name> hands <Character Name> # gold pieces and takes the <Item Name?.\par
job : "Oh, I'm not important like you. I'm just a weaponsmith--and only a journeyman at that."\par
jour : "Aye, just a few years ago I was a simple apprentice."\par
"Now I supply arms to all Trinsic!"\par
name : "My name's Brandon, <Gender>, and I'm honored to meet thee!"\'b0\par
join : "That would be a great honor! I'd love to!"\par
The man comes to his senses.\par
"But no, I can't. I've responsibilites here, especially now."\par
well,good,fine,okay,grea : "And glad I am to hear it!"\par
now,supp : "I have to make weapons to help fight the gargoyles!"\par
bye,noth : "Farewell! May thy quest succeed, Avatar!"\par
weap : "Perhaps you'd like to buy some. I'd be honored to have thee as a customer."\par
other : "Beg pardon, <Gender>?"\par
Immanuelle\par
Introduction : a sultry, dark-skinned woman dressed in riding-leathers.\par
Subsequent visits : "Hello again, my friend. What can I do for you?\par
Initial visit : "Hello, stranger(s). What can I do for thee\'a2 this <Time of Day>?"\par
name : "Some call me Immanuelle, <Gender>."\par
"Others call me...something else."\par
She winks at you.\par
some,else : If male : "Perhaps some time I will show you..."\par
If female : "I think you get the idea."\par
show : "Not here."\par
job : "I raise horses here, in the stables."\par
"I also sell horses, if you wish to buy one."\par
sell,hors : "I can hardly bear to part with any of these magnificent beasts."\par
"But there are a few that fail to please me."\par
"If you wish to buy one of them, just say the word."\par
buy Not at shop : "Come to my shop when I'm open!"\par
At shop : Avatar solo, has horse : "But thou already hast a horse!"\par
Avatar in party, all have horses : "But all of you are already on horses!"\par
No horse : "Which of you?"\par
"Aye, <Character Name>, thou hast need of a horse."\par
Not enough gold : "But thou canst not afford one!"\par
Have gold : "My price is # gold pieces, no less. Interested?"\par
yes-"Good!" <NPC Name> takes <Character Name>'s gold, and hands over the reins of a fine horse.\par
no-"Perhaps some other time then."\par
Party members don't have horses : "How about one of thy friends/thy friend?"\par
bye : "Come back again soon!"\par
As you leave, she blows you a kiss.\par
other : "Beg pardon, <Gender>?"\par
Tobatha\par
Introduction : a doddering old woman.\par
"Who are you and what d'ye want?"\par
Randomly throughout conversation : "Eh? Speak up!"\par
heal : Avatar solo, uninjured : "What do you mean, heal? Thou art not wounded!"\par
Avatar in party, uninjured : "What do you mean, heal? None of you are wounded!"\par
Injured : "Which of you?"\par
"Aye, I see thy wound, <Character Name>."\par
"Wilt thou make an offering of 30 gold?"\par
yes-Laying hands upon <Character Name>, Tobatha mends the wounds.\par
no-"Well, if thou wilt not pay, why should I heal thee?"\par
yes, no gold, low karma-"You youngsters think everything should be free!"\par
yes, no gold, high karma-"Thou art not too bad, for a youngster."\par
"All right, I'll heal ye."\par
Laying hands upon <Character Name>, Tobatha mends the wounds.\par
"What else ya want?"\par
cure : Avatar solo, not poisoned : "What do you mean, cure? Thou art not poisoned!"\par
Avatar in party, not poisoned : "What do you mean, cure? None of you are poisoned!"\par
Poisoned : "Which of you?"\par
"Aye, <Character Name>, I can tell that thou art poisoned."\par
"Wilt thou make an offering of 10 gold?"\par
yes-Laying hands upon <Character Name>, Tobatha removes the poison.\par
no-"Well if thou won't pay, thou won't get cured!"\par
yes, no gold, low karma-"You youngsters think everything should be free!"\par
yes, no gold, high karma-"Thou art not too bad, for a youngster."\par
"All right, I'll cure ye."\par
Laying hands upon <Character Name>, Tobatha removes the poison.\par
resu : No corpse : "Eh? What foolishness is this?"\par
"There ain't no dead person here!"\par
Have corpse : "Well, ain't that just like youngsters?"\par
"Makin' mistakes and expecting their elders to bail them out."\par
"Well, today's your lucky day."\par
"Wilt thou make an offering of 400 gold?"\par
no-"Then go see a gravedigger. I'll reckon his price'll be lower."\par
yes, not enough gold : "That ain't enough money."\par
"Thou art # gold piece(s) short."\par
"Go see a gravedigger. I'll reckon his price'll be lower."\par
yes-Your party takes up a collection for their fallen comrade.\par
Tobatha lays hands upon the corpse...\par
"Doman..."\par
"thixus..."\par
"anretu!"\par
And the dead live again!\par
If have another corpse : "I see that <Character Name>'s got another one."\par
name : "My name's Tobatha." "But you can call me maam, youngster."\par
toba : "That's maam to you, youngster. Respect your elders!"\par
maam,ma'a : "That's better. Now, what did you want?"\par
job : "Job? I'm a mender of the inflicted!"\par
"If I weren't, why would you be here?"\par
"Now stop this foolishness and tell me what you want, youngster."\par
infl : "I can heal, cure, and even raise dead!"\par
than : "Oh, sure! Thou art just trying to get on my good side."\par
"Well, it won't work!"\par
bye,no : "Hmph! And not so much as a thank-you."\par
"Well, that's kids today for ye! No manners, the lot of 'em!"\par
yes "Well, what can I do for thee?"\par
other : "Don't bother me with that!"\par
Arturos\par
Introduction : a colorfully clad, bemused looking gypsy.\par
"Hey, paisan! If you were looking to geta your fortune told, you came to the right place."\par
name : "I'ma called Arturos. That meansa either 'foolish monkey' or 'he who sells cheese', depending on howa you translate it."\par
fool,monk,chee,tran : "Yeah, go figure, huh?"\par
map : If purchased map : "Yeah, I used to have a map like that. Can't remember what I did with it, though..."\par
If didn't purchase map : "Map. Hmm, map... Oh yeah, thata old thing. Sure, I got that, but she'sa not very interesting."\par
"Say--do you want to buy it?"\par
no-"Nah, I didn't think so. What for would anybody want to buy it, ah?"\par
yes-"Oh! Well, sure you do, she's a very important map!"\par
He leads you away from the rest of the group. "Don't want no spyin' ears, ah?"\par
"Yeah, this map, she'sa leading to the treasure of - oh, who was it, Yellowbeard or somebody."\par
"Well, I forget, but the point is it leads to a big, huge treasure!"\par
"So if you want this map you're agonna have to pay - 100 gold! Okay?"\par
yes-"Okay, here's the map, and may fortune bring you lotsa gold!"\par
no-"Well, I hate to see anybody pass up good fortune, so I tell you what I do."\par
"I sell you this map, this key to infinite wealth, for just 75 gold. Okay?"\par
yes-"Okay, here's the map, and may fortune bring you lotsa gold!"\par
no-"What, are you nuts? But okay, how'sabout just 50 gold?"\par
yes-"Okay, here's the map, and may fortune bring you lotsa gold!"\par
no-"Thank you! You have asaved me from amaking a big mistake!"\par
"You're right, I better hold on to this valuable map myself. No way is it worth less than 100 gold."\par
yes, but not enough gold-"Hey, what are you, a deadbeat? Come back when you can afford the map!"\par
yes, but inventory full-"Yeah, well, you've got a lot to carry right now."\par
"I do you a favor and just hold on to the map for you until you got room for it."\par
"I do you another favor and hold on to the money, too."\par
job : "Ima the king of all the gypsies."\par
"Of course, thatsa what you call more of an 'honorary' title, so I tell fortunes on the side."\par
hono,titl,king,gyps,artu : "You cana just call me 'Uncle Arthur' if you like."\par
zolt : "He's a whadda you call, an impostor. You shouldn'ta listen to him."\par
tell,fort,card\par
\f1\'98"I gota this fine set of fortune telling cards. These werea hand painted by Musgrave himself."\par
"For justa two gold,\par
If not asked about tablet : "I'll tella you your future. Whadda you say?"\par
If asked about tablet : "maybe I can help you finda this silver tablet."\par
"And I'll tell you the rest of your future as well. What a bargain! Whadda you say?"\par
no-"Ok, have it your way."\par
"But ifa some maniac with an axe catches you in a dark alley somewhere, don'ta blame me for not warning you."\par
yes, but no gold-"Come back whena you have the money."\par
yes, have gold-He takes out a deck of cards, shuffles it, and has you pick one.\par
"Okay, thisa card, she'sa the Tower. That means you'rea going to go into a real big building soon, like maybe a castle."\par
"Pretty good, huh? Maybe you want a better card, though. Do you want to pick again?"\par
no-"Okay."\par
yes-You pick another card. "This here isa the Wheel of Fortune."\par
"Wheels, they go 'round and 'round, so that means you'rea gonna have some good luck, and some bad luck."\par
"That doesn't tell you so much. Try for another card?"\par
no-"Okay."\par
yes-"Oh, hey, you picked the Lovers this time. I thinka maybe you should go talk to Andreas/Wanda, you know what I mean?"\par
"That'sa pretty good card. How about another one?"\par
no-"Okay."\par
yes-"This here's Temperance. Thata means that you shouldn't lose your temper."\par
"I cana find you a better card than that, here, wait a minute."\par
He picks out a card. "This is Justice, that'sa one of what they call the 'court cards.' Let me try again." He picks another.\par
"Okay, this isa better. This is the Hierophant. That'sa like an elephant, but taller and without the trunk."\par
"That means you'rea gonna see one of them someday. Pretty interesting, huh? Another card?"\par
no-"Okay."\par
yes-"Uh-oh, you justa drew the Death card. That means eithera you're going to kill somebody soon, ora somebody's gonna kill you."\par
"I can never geta that part straight. One more card?"\par
no-"Okay."\par
yes-"Allaright, now we're talking. You pickeda the Crow card. That'sa telling you adventuring isa for the birds."\par
"You should open a little shop somewhere and settle down, you know?"\par
"The cards didn't say nothin' about the silver tablet. Guess that means you're not gonna find it."\par
"Okay, that'sa # extra cards at 5 gold apiece. That makes # total."\par
If not enough gold : "Since you don'ta have that much, I'll just settle for what you've got."\par
"That's life, you know?"\par
If have enough gold : "It was a pleasure doinga business with you."\par
uncl,arth : "That'sa nice and friendly. I like you too." He comes over and gives you a big hug.\par
bye : "Hey, you come again soon, okay?"\par
Shamino whispers to you, "Best check your coinpouch. I think I saw something when that gypsy hugged you."\f0\'a2\par
silv,tabl : "The silver tablet? I don't know anything about that."\par
"But hey, maybe there's something in the cards about it, ah?"\par
other : "Can'ta you think of something more interesting to talk about?"\par
Andreas\par
Introduction : a handsome, carefree gypsy man.\par
If female : "Hey, foxy! I bet you'd like me to unsheathe my weapon so you can have a look..."\par
If male : "Hey there! Welcome to our humble caravan!"\par
either gender : "You look like a bold warrior - would you like to spar a bit for practice?"\par
Subsequent visits, female : "Ah, I see you couldn't stay away... I have that effect on women."\par
Subsequent visits, male : "Welcome back, <Avatar Name>. Came for some more of our gypsy hospitality, I see!"\par
name : "I am Andreas, prince of the gypsies."\par
job : "I live the carefree life of a gypsy, traveling hither and yon."\par
love : If female : "Naturally, when so lovely a lady as yourself comes along, I offer, shall we say, my services."\par
If male : "When the opportunity arises, I do what I can to brighten the lives of the ladies."\par
If female in party : "I'll just bet he does!"\par
"Of course, you'd probably be more interested in my sister Wanda, right?"\par
yes-"Can't say I blame you. In fact, if she wasn't my sister..."\par
no-"Hmm, wouldn't have figured you for the type..."\par
prof,serv : "We all have our talents. I myself happen to have two."\par
"I'd be glad to show you sometime!"\par
tale,show : "What, you mean swordplay? Just ask, and I'll give thee a lesson you won't forget!"\par
wand : "She practices the world's oldest profession. I, of course, have perfected it, and thus need no practice."\par
artu : "He's my dad - the king of the gypsies!"\par
map : "A map? Aye, Arturos has some scrap like that. I know nothing more of it."\par
trav,care,gyps,prin,king,life : "Wouldn't you like to be a gypsy too?"\par
no'-"The more fool you!"\par
yes, low karma-"You have the carefree spirit, but alas, one must be born a gypsy."\par
yes, high karma-"A fine thing to dream of! But one such as you could never be a gypsy."\par
swor,spar,weap,unsh,less : "Would you like to spar a bit?"\par
no-"Maybe some other time."\par
yes-Pulling a couple of sticks from his belt, the gypsy hands you one. You fight with them as if they were swords for a while.\par
After you're finished, he comes over and puts his arm around your shoulder as he gives you a few pointers on fencing style.\par
You're not sure, but you think perhaps you felt a slight tug at the pouch you keep your coins in.\par
silv,tabl : "Ah yes, you've heard of the silver tablet!"\par
"I haven't got it myself, but I can tell you where it is for a price... Shall we say 7 gold pieces?"\par
no-"Suit yourself."\par
yes, but no gold-"Come back when you have the money."\par
yes-"I overheard a bard in a tavern say that it was somewhere on the Isle of the Avatar."\par
"Perhaps Arturos could tell you precisely."\par
bye : If had sex : "Come again soon."\par
If didn't have sex : "I hope we get better acquainted when next we meet."\par
If female : "I like your clothes, but I think you'd look better without them..."\par
If male : "May your travels prove interesting."\par
sex,screw,boff,suck,head,lay,roll,hay,kink,make : "Oho, so that's what you're after, you naughty girl/boy!"\par
If female : "For a mere 10 gold pieces, I'll transport you to the heights of ecstasy. Will it be yea or nay?"\par
If male : "Well... Normally I'm more of a ladies' man. But I guess your money is as good as anyone else's. It'll cost you 10 gold, okay?"\par
If already did sex : "My mind is willing, but the flesh is weak..."\par
"Come back later, when I've had some time to rest."\par
If solo : A voice in the back of your head asks, "Do you really have time for this?"\par
If in group : <Character Name> interrupts. "`<Gender>, I really doubt we have time for this..."\par
"Well, come on. Yea or nay, <Gender>?"\par
no-"As you like. But take my advice--you should live a little now."\par
"That way, you'll have something to remember when you're old and gray..."\par
yes, but no gold-"Hey, you don't have the money! I don't take charity cases."\par
yes-The gypsy leads you into a nearby wagon...\par
After a while, you and he wander back to the rest of the caravan, weary but satisfied.\par
If solo : You try to ignore the nagging voice in the back of your head that says you shouldn't have wasted time like that.\par
If in party : <Character Name> scowls. "Well, you've certainly picked a fine one to be carrying on with."\par
"I would remind you that Britannia is under invasion by hordes of gargoyles, but I'd hate to spoil your fun..."\par
<NPC Name> laughs. "'Tis not a crime to give yourself over to pleasure..."\par
other : "Don't trouble yourself about that. The art of the sword and the art of love are all that really matter."\par
Wanda\par
Introduction : a gypsy wench with a voluptuous figure.\par
If female : "Hello, wench. How goes it?"\par
If male : "Well, hello handsome! Looking for a little... relaxation?"\par
yes-"Well this is the place!"\par
no-"Ha! You must be afraid of what your mother might think."\par
name : "They call me '@Wicked Wanda,' <Character Name>"\par
wick,wand : "If we can find someplace private, I'll gladly show you how I got my nickname..."\par
plac,rela,find,priv,show,nick,pay,swee,sale\par
"Hmm, sounds like I've piqued your interest..."\par
"Why madam/sirrah, are you trying to insinuate something?"\par
She breaks into a fit of giggles.\par
sex,screw,boff,suck,head,lay,roll,hay,kink,make : If already had sex : "Again, so soon? Nay, come back later, when I've had a little time to rest."\par
If female : "I don't get many lady customers... but why not? You're sure this is what you want?\par
male/female : "I've a cot in my wagon... 15 gold's the price--and I don't haggle! Interested, <Character Name>?"\par
If in party : <Character Name> speaks. "I don't think we have time for this..."\par
If solo : A voice in the back of your head asks, "Do you really have time for this?"\par
"Come on, <Character Name>. Cross my palm with 15 gold and I'll show you a good time. Okay?"\par
no-"Fine! Come back when you get permission from your mother!"\par
yes, but no gold-"Hey, I don't give credit! No pay, no play, capish?"\par
yes-Taking you by the hand, the gyspy wench leads you off to her wagon.\par
After a time, you return to your comrades.\par
If in party : "That's a fine way to be carrying on when all of Britannia is in danger!"\par
"When our quest is complete, then there will be time enough for wenching!"\par
"Nothing's wrong with a little fun. There's plenty of time... as long as there's plenty of gold!"\par
If solo : You try to ignore the nagging voice in the back of your mind that keeps saying, "You shouldn't have wasted time like that."\par
map : We don't have... Oh, wait, there was something!"\par
"Arturos, he, uh, found a map last time we were up at Empath Abbey."\par
artu : "He'll tell your fortune for you, Character Name>. Just ask him!"\par
fort : "That's right."\par
empa,abbe : "I don't care much for them. They're all too stuck up."\par
silv,tabl : "Andreas has a silver tablet you could ask him about."\par
"But I have something much sweeter for sale..."\par
andr : If female : "He could show you a real good time, honey!"\par
If male : "He's in the same line of work as I am--but I think I'm more your type!"\par
late,time,rest : "'Tis tiring work, you know."\par
bye : If had sex : "'Twas a business doing pleasure with you... I hope you come again soon!"\par
If female, no sex : "See you around... And if you meet anyone tall, dark and handsome, send 'em my way!"\par
If male, no sex : "If you ever decide you need a break from adventuring, come find me again."\par
other : "Why concern yourself with that, <Character Name>?"\par
"Surely you can think of something more pleasant..."\par
Yew\par
\par
Ben (U6)\par
Introduction : a man as large as the trees that surround his cottage.\par
In home, friend : "You're welcome here."\par
In home, not friend : "Why you bargin' inta my house?" he shouts.\par
Hefting his large axe, he prepares to defend his home.\par
In forest, not friend, subsequent times : "Hah, sneakin' around in my forest, huh?"\par
"I told ya once already that I want to be left alone!"\par
In forest, not friend, initial time : "I told the last one of ya that came by that I'll have nothin' t'do with yer wars, so shove off!"\par
In forest, friend : "Hullo again, friend."\par
name : "Ben. My friends call me Big Ben."\par
Friend : "But you ain't one of my friends."\par
Not friend : "I guess you can call me 'Big Ben'." He smiles broadly.\par
big : Friend : He fires a look at you. "I said only my friends call me that."\par
Not friend : "'Tis my name. Don't wear it out." He laughs resoundingly at his wit.\par
ben : "'Tis my name. Don't wear it out." He laughs resoundingly at his wit.\par
frie : "It surprises you that I would have some."\par
"Sometimes it surprises me too." He laughs.\par
job : "Have ya never seen a lumberman before?"\par
"Look around. Those stacks o' wood don't cut themselves."\par
fore : "Aye, this is where I cut trees, and I don't like strangers wanderin' through!"\par
Friend : "You're welcome here, though."\par
war,alon : "Ever since I won that choppin' contest, the king's had a notion I'd be good at wittlin' on men the same way."\par
"Well, you can tell him I'm not interested."\par
king : "You are from the king, ain't ya?"\par
yes-"I knew it!"\par
no-"Oh." He seems friendlier now.\par
buy,wood,log,yew : Aye, are ya here to buy a log?"\par
no, friend-"Well, what do ya want then?"\par
no, not friend-"Well, come back sometime and I'll cut one for ya."\par
yes-"Who wants it?"\par
no character selected : "Well, why'd ya say you wanted one?"\par
Character Full : "But <Character Name> can't carry a log!"\par
No gold-"But <Character Name> don't have 5 gold!"\par
Else-"Logs is 5 gold apiece. Ya still want one?"\par
yes-<NPC Name> takes <Character Name>'s gold and hands over a fine yew log.\par
Ben seems friendlier now.\par
no-"Too pricey for ya, eh?"\par
bye : Not friend : "Careful in those woods now. Accidents happen...."\par
Friend : "Careful in those woods now."\par
other : "I spend too much time in these woods. Ask someone else."\par
Lenard\par
Introduction : a short, fat, rosy-cheeked man with long hair covering his eyes.\par
Subsequent visits : "He--hello, <Gender>. Nice to see thee again."\par
Initial visit : The man seems afraid of you. "Wh-what do you want?"\par
name : As faint as a whisper comes the word "Le'nard."\par
job : "I'm a tailor, <Gender>."\par
bye : He looks around, then waves goodbye.\par
sell,thre : No thread : "But - but none of you has any thread to sell."\par
Have thread : "Which of you?"\par
<NPC Name> turns to <Character Name>, and says "Will you take 8 gold for that thread?"\par
yes-"Good, good." He hands <Character Name> 8 gold pieces and takes the thread.\par
no-"Oh. Okay."\par
buy,tail : "I sew pants, tunics and dresses, <Gender>. I use a lot of thread."\par
pant,tuni,dres : "Who?"\par
No character selected : "Oh, sorry. I thought thou wanted to buy something."\par
Character selected : full-"I'm sorry, but I really don't think <Character Name> can carry that."\par
No gold-"I'm sorry, but I really don't think <Character Name> can afford that."\par
Have gold-"That costs #. Do you still want it?"\par
yes-<NPC Name> takes <Character Name>'s gold and hands over the purchase.\par
no, first times-"I'm sorry! That's still too expensive, isn't it? Here, I'll sell it for # gold, okay?"\par
no, last time-"I'm terribly sorry, but I can't sell it for less!"\par
ball,plan,silk,bag : Don't have plans : "I'm not sure what you mean."\par
Have plans : "I wouldn't know where to begin. Ask Marissa in Paws."\par
other : He stands still for a moment and then shrugs.\par
Andrea\par
Introduction : an enormous woman, both in size and personality.\par
Subsequent visits : "Hello again, dears/fellah!" she screams as she strides over to you with beer mugs in her hands.\par
"Welcome to the Slaughtered Lamb. What can I get you?"\par
name : "Andrea! And yours, my fine friend?"\par
If female : "Pleased to meet you, dear."\par
If male : "I'm very pleased to meet you," she purrs.\par
andr : "Yes. Them's who I beat at arm wrestling call me Miss Barlap, though. Out of respect." She laughs.\par
arm,wres : Avatar won : "Alright, alright, I admit it - ya won fair an' square."\par
"No need to gloat about it..."\par
Avatar lost : "Now don't feel bad, sugar, lots of folks lose to Andrea!" She laughs heartily.\par
Not fought yet : She looks you up and down and then feels your arm. "Care for a match?"\par
yes-"Yer on!" She grabs your arm and the contest begins!\par
"Arrghh!!!"\par
"Nnghhh!!!"\par
"Unghhh!!!"\par
And the winner is... <Name>!!!\par
no"Well, maybe some other time, sugar..."\par
job : "Honey, I've had many jobs in my time. But runnin' this pub is the best, 'cause I get to meet the strongest men."\par
"I sell ribs, ale, mead, wine, and rations."\par
buy : "Which, ribs, ale, mead, wine, or rations?"\par
ribs : "Which of you?"\par
"That'll be 6 gold, okay?"\par
yes, no gold-"You can't afford it, sweetie."\par
yes, full-"You don't have room to carry it."\par
yes-<NPC Name> gives <Character Name> some ribs.\par
mead,ale,wine : "Which of you?"\par
"That's # gold, okay?"\par
yes, no gold-"You can't afford it, sweetie."\par
yes, full-"You don't have room to carry it."\par
yes-<NPC Name> gives <Character Name> some <Item Name>.\par
"That ought to hold you."\par
rati : "Which of you?"\par
"Rations are 4 gold apiece. How many do you want?"\par
Can carry 0 : <NPC Name> looks at <Character Name>. "You haven't any room in your pack."\par
Can afford 0 : "You can't afford it, sweetie."\par
Can afford/carry all : <NPC Name> hands the rations to <Character Name>.\par
Can afford/carry some : She hands <Character Name> # ration(s) of mutton.\par
"That's all you can carry."\par
-or- : "That's all you can afford."\par
stro,men : "Look around. Here you'll find the men whose lives have lead them to many dangerous places."\par
Someone in a dark corner shouts "Like this pub!" and all the patrons laugh.\par
Lena : "A little girlie-man. But he does make some fine clothes."\par
big,ben : "Now there's a man." She looks into a beer mug and fixes her hair.\par
"I wish he'd come into town more often."\par
chan : "That old witch? She may not have hit the bottle, but I believe a few have hit her."\par
The patrons around you chuckle.\par
garg : "I've never seen any creature that could scare me. I say if they want trouble, come in this pub!"\par
The men around her let out a cheer and she turns, acknowledging them with a bow.\par
lord,brit : "He's never been in here. Can't imagine why--it seems like his kind of establishment."\par
bye : "So long. Come back when you're thirsty."\par
"And if you see that cutie Utomo, tell him Andrea says hi."\par
other : "Ask around."\par
Utomo\par
Introduction : a huge, dark-skined man with a close-set face.\par
Subsequent visits : "Ombogo sano!" he says, smiling widely.\par
Initial visit : "Ombogo dono," he grunts at you from behind a large forge.\par
buy : I have many things here. You want arms or armor?"\par
arms,armo : Shop closed : "Come to my shop when I'm open!"\par
Shop open : "Which of you?"\par
No character selected : "What else?"\par
"Which item?"\par
No item selected : "What else?"\par
Item selected : "Sell <Item Name> for # gold."\par
"Okay, <Character Name>?"\par
yes, no room-"<Item Name> is too heavy for you, <Character Name>!"\par
yes-After accepting <Character Name>'s gold, <NPC Name> hands over the <Item Name>.\par
yes, no gold-"<Item Name> cost too much for you, <Character Name>!"\par
sell : Shop closed : "Come to my shop when I'm open!"\par
Shop open : Have no items : "But you no have thing I want!"\par
Have items : "<Character Name> have something I want..."\par
"Which of you?"\par
No character selected : "What else?"\par
Character selected : "Which item?"\par
"I give # gold for that <Item Name>, okay <Character Name>?"\par
no-"Maybe later."-or-"Maybe something else?"\par
yes-"Good!" <NPC Name> hands <Character Name> # gold pieces and takes the <Item Name>.\par
"No more, ah? Okay."\par
ombo : "That mean 'hello.'"\par
dono : "That mean 'person I don't know.'"\par
sano : "That mean 'friend.'"\par
name : Subsequent times : "Utomo remember you, how you not remember Utomo?"\par
Initial time : "Utomo, from island."\par
utom,isla : "Utomo mean 'island' in my language. I also from island."\par
"Bring magic fan from island. This town new home for Utomo now."\par
fan,magi : "Lady on island make magic fans. They make big wind, blow ships all around."\par
job<br "Utomo make good weapons. Make one for you if you like."\par
weap : "Learn to make as boy. I live on island then."\par
from,home : "I come here from many days away. My home burned by evil man."\par
many,days : "I not sure where. Got ride on big ship."\par
big,ship : "I stow away when night come. After long time we land and I jump off."\par
burn,evil,man : He say to me, 'You man, you leave home and kill good people with me.' I ran from him."\par
kill,good,peop : "Like people in town. Like Lord British."\par
Andr : "Utomo go and drink at her home."\par
She try kiss Utomo. Utomo say, 'I no want you' but she kiss anyway."\par
"Utomo not go back there."\par
kiss : "Utomo have girl back home."\par
"She not thin like Andrea."\par
"Someday Utomo go back and get her."\par
"Someday."\par
He plays the poker over the hot coals and looks absently into the fire.\par
girl,back : Her name Yuna. She good tree climber. I not see her for long time."\par
omdu,yaf : "In my land it mean 'You have good meal in sun.'"\par
"It is goodbye in my land."\par
bye : "Omdu Yaf."\par
other : "I speak not too much your language."\par
Nicodemus\par
Introduction : a wizened old man with a ready smile.\par
"Good <Time of Day>, Avatar. For what purpose hast thou come?"\par
buy,reag : "Which of you?"\par
"Which of these?"\par
<Item Name> costs # per portion."\par
"How many dost thou want?"\par
Have enough gold : <NPC Name> hands <Character Name> the <Item Name>.\par
Not enough space : "Thou cannot carry that much!"\par
"I'll give thee #; thou dost not need the rest."\par
No space : "Thou cannot carry any <Item Name>!"\par
Not enough gold : "Thou cannot afford that much!"\par
"I'll give thee #; thou cannot have the rest."\par
No gold : "Thou cannot afford any <Item Name>!"\par
lear,spel : If no spellbook, solo : "But thou hast not a spellbook!"\par
If no spellbook, party : "But none of you has a spellbook!"\par
If have spellbook : "Which of you?"\par
"In which Circle does <Character Name> wish to study?"\par
If not 1-8 : "As everybody knows, there are only eight circles."\par
Level higher than character : "I sense that <Character Name> is only ready for the # Circle."\par
"But such matters are not my concern..."\par
If no spells available : "I have no spells of that circle."\par
"Which of these?"\par
"That spell costs # gold. Interested?"\par
no-"Perhaps <Character Name> is not ready for this circle."\par
yes-<NPC Name> hands <Character Name> a piece of rune-covered parchment.\par
yes, no gold-"<Character Name> lacks the # gold required."\par
book : "Which of you?"\par
No space : "But thou cannot carry a spellbook!"\par
Not enough gold : "But thou cannot afford a spellbook!"\par
"A spellbook costs 45 gold pieces. Interested?"\par
no-"Perhaps one of thy friends then."\par
yes-\par
staf : "Yes, I make magical yew staves."\par
"If thou knowest the Enchant spell, thou canst lock a spell within the staff for quick use!"\par
"A yew staff costs 100 gold pieces, but it's worth twice that!"\par
"Wouldst thou like to buy one?"\par
no-"Perhaps some other time, then."\par
yes-"Which of you?"\par
no space-"But thou cannot carry a staff!"\par
no gold-"But thou cannot afford a staff!"\par
space and gold-The old man hands <Character Name> a yew staff.\par
name : "I am Nicodemus."\par
job : "Why, bless me, I work here!"\par
"I sell reagents, teach spells, and craft magic staves."\par
"I also do a little experimenting."\par
expe : "Oh, nothing a great adventurer such as yourself would be interested in."\par
hint : He gets a suspicious look in his eyes.\par
"Don't be too nosy, girlie/sonny!"\par
bye : "Come back anytime!"\par
other : "Nope, nope, I won't talk about that!"\par
Lenora\par
Introduction : a tall, stern woman, with graying red hair and a perpetual scowl.\par
If angered Lenora : "Well, Avatar. I graciously grant thee another interview."\par
"I certainly hope thou wilt be more respectful this time."\par
Subsequent visits : "Welcome again, worthy Avatar, to my hall.\par
Initial visit : "Welcome, worthy Avatar, to the Hall of Justice."\par
"How may we assist thee in thy quest?"\par
name : "I am Lenora, Lady Mayor of Yew."\par
job : "It is my honor to preside over this town and its courts."\par
"We also provide the finest wood in the realm."\par
wood,log : "Go ask Ben the logger."\par
"Head west from here into the forest until you can go no further."\par
"Then look for a way through the trees to the north."\par
cour : "In Yew we take pride in our system of justice."\par
just : "Indeed, the Rune of Justice itself was sent here for safekeeping."\par
rune : "A thief stole the rune from the grave of our most respected resident, the former Lord Mayor."\par
"Even though the thief was caught, we have not yet found the rune."\par
thie,caug,wher : "The thief is in the jail, awaiting the carriage of justice."\par
mant : "'Tis most strange, Avatar, that thou knowest not the Mantra of Justice."\par
"How can that be?"\par
No answer : "Thou may return when thou seest fit to answer my question!"\par
Any other answer : "Hmmm...well, no matter," she says suspiciously.\par
"I suppose 'twould be improper to deny anything the Avatar requires."\par
"The Mantra of Justice is 'beh.'"\par
lett,perm : "A letter of permission?"\par
"Dost thou truly need to speak with that reprehensible thief?"\par
yes-"Very well then." Putting quill to parchment, she drafts a quick letter.\par
"The jailer will now let you in, or verily shall he answer to me!"\par
no-"Then why dost thou waste my time with frivolous requests?!"\par
"Begone, Avatar, and return when thou hast more serious business on thy mind!"\par
rele,deal,let,free,trad,swap,allo,go,out : "What, free the thief in return for the rune? Never!"\par
"To do so would betray everything the rune itself stands for!"\par
"Better to leave it lost."\par
kid,chil,fami,feed : "What? What stories has that thief been telling you?"\par
"He has no family--he's just a drifter!"\par
"Don't be taken in by his lies."\par
lie : "Tell him he's not fooling anyone."\par
ench,nico : "Nicodemus the enchanter lives near here. His house lies between two rivers."\par
bye : "May you find that which thou deservest on thy quest."\par
other : "Noble Avatar, the affairs of state weigh heavily upon my time. Pray be precise in thy questioning."\par
-or- : "Noble Avatar, we hardly have time to chat about <Last Input> in view of the perils facing our land!"\par
bye : "Hmpf! Well, mayhap 'twould be best for you to seek such wisdom elsewhere!"\par
Boskin\par
Introduction : a short, heavyset man dressed in rags.\par
If called on lie : "I ain't talkin' to you, you're just like all the rest!"\par
"I'll never crack, no matter 'ow many times you come back!"\par
Subsequent times after called on lie : "All right, I give up."\par
"The rune is 'idden under a potted plant at the Slaughtered Lamb."\par
"Now go away and leave me alone."\par
Subsequent visits : "<Gender>! Am I glad to see thee!"\par
"You're me last light in a world of darkness."\par
Initial visit : "Who's there?" the thief calls insolently.\par
The thief's tone becomes more respectful as he recognizes you.\par
"'Strewth, it's the Avatar!"\par
"You've got to get me out of 'ere, <Gender>!"\par
grav,rob,crim,stol,out : "I admit I robbed that grave."\par
"But it were only because 'is Lordship wouldn't be needin' that stuff no more."\par
"I 'ad me kids to feed, didn't I?"\par
rune : "I'll tell you where the rune is if you'll let me go. I've got me kids to think of."\par
kids,fami,feed,farm,hars,out,here : Tears fill the man's eyes.\par
"My poor children've got no one to take care of them now."\par
"I only stole to feed them, and that's the truth."\par
true,trut : "True? Of course it's true!"\par
"Even a thief like me wouldn't lie to the Avatar."\par
know,lie,lyin,fals,fool : "All right, I admit it. I 'aven't got any kids."\par
"But that stupid cow they got runnin' this place won't listen to reason--a little give-and-take, know what I mean?"\par
"I tell you what."\par
"If I tell you where the rune is, will you take it away?"\par
"I don't want these pompous blighters to 'ave it. Okay?"\par
no-"Then the gargoyles can take the lot of you!"\par
"You'll never get nothin' out of me!"\par
yes-"All right, I'll take your word for it."\par
"Go to the Slaughtered Lamb; I 'id the rune under a potted plant there."\par
"And spit on Her Ladyship for me!"\par
rele,let,free,go,allo,set,home : "You mean it, <Gender>? Are they gonna let me go 'ome?"\par
no-His face falls. "Then I ain't sayin' nothin'. I've got me kids to think of, I do."\par
yes-His face lights up. "I knew I could count on you, <Gender>!"\par
"And I'll keep my end of the bargain."\par
"I 'id the rune under a potted plant in the Slaughtered Lamb inn."\par
If Iolo in party : As you leave, Iolo whispers to you.\par
"Maybe it was necessary, <Avatar Name>, but lying makes me uneasy. Even to someone like him."\par
name : "Me name's Boskin, <Gender>."\par
job : "I'm but a poor farmer, forced into crime by the harshness of these times."\par
"There weren't no other way to feed me family, <Gender>!"\par
bye : "Please, <Gender>! Tell them to let me go 'ome!"\par
"Tell them about me poor fatherless kids! They'll listen to you!"\par
other : "Beg your pardon, <Gender>?"\par
Pridgarm\par
Introduction : an old man, tall and thin. He spends all his time whittling.\par
Received keys : "Good <Time of Day>, <Gender>. Done with the key yet?"\par
yes, no keys-"Well, where is it?"\par
"Well, that does me no good."\par
"Need it here."\par
Without another word, the jailer returns to his carving.\par
yes, have keys-"Much obliged," the taciturn jailer says as he takes the key.\par
no-"Well, bring it back to me when you are."\par
Without another word, the jailer returns to his carving.\par
Don't have keys : "Good <Time of Day>, <Gender>. What can I do for you?"\par
thie,robb : "He's in solitary, right over there."\par
lock,see,meet,talk,soli,ther : "You'll need my key to get in there."\par
key,your,give,plea : "Yup, I could give you the key...."\par
"But not without Her Ladyship's permission."\par
perm,impo,ques,avat,lett,lady,must,need : "You got a letter of permission from Her Ladyship?"\par
yes, no letter-"Gotta have a letter if you want to see the thief."\par
yes, have letter-"Okay, here's the key."\par
"Give it back when you're done."\par
no-"Well, gotta have a letter if you want to see the thief."\par
brib,mone,pay,give : "You offering me a bribe?"\par
yes-He thinks for a moment.\par
"Nope. Sorry, not interested."\par
no-"Pity. Never been offered a bribe before."\par
name : "Name's Pridgarm."\par
job : "I mind the jail."\par
"Got a prisoner in solitary right now."\par
jail : "Got four of the cleanest cells you could ask fer."\par
cell : "Say, you looking to get the keys to my jail cells?"\par
no-"Okay. Never had nobody sound so interested in jest hearing about the jail before."\par
yes-"Well, ya know, I shouldn't do this."\par
"But Her Ladyship is a little too strict about who she puts in here."\par
"So I make up fer it by being a little careless with the keys, if you take my meaning."\par
He tosses you some keys, then turns his back on you.\par
pris : "Feller broke into the grave of His Lordship, the late Mayor."\par
rune,fami,free,feed,kids,rele,deal,go,allo,trad,brok,grav,lord : "'Taint my place to talk about that. You should go see Her Ladyship, the Mayor."\par
bye : The jailer nods and says "<Time of Day>."\par
other : "Don't know nothing about that."\par
-or- : The old man simply shrugs and keeps on whittling.\par
Jaana\par
Introduction : the druidess Jaana.\par
In party : "I fear I know little that would help in this situation, <Gender>."\par
Previously told to leave : "Good <Time of Day>, <Gender>. Hast thou need of my services again?"\par
yes-"Ask me to join and I will, gladly, <Gender>!"\par
no-"Very well. Thou needst but ask..."\par
Subsequent visits : "Good <Time of Day>, <Gender>! Hast thou fared well in thy travels?"\par
yes-"Joyous news! Thou must tell me of it sometime."\par
no-"Mayhap I could help. Ask me to join thy band, <Gender>, and gladly I will!"\par
Initial visit : "<Avatar Name>! 'Tis a great joy and relief to see thou hast returned to Britannia, <Gender>!"\par
She greets your other traveling companions.\par
Everyone seems pleased to be reunited, albeit under tense circumstances.\par
"Mayhap I can help thee in thy struggle against the gargoyles."\par
"Thou needst but ask and I will gladly join, <Gender>."\par
name : "Why, my name's Jaana, <Gender>."\par
"Surely my help in thy previous quests was not so insignificant that thou hast forgotten it!"\par
job : "Since thy last visit to Britannia, I have lived in Yew, blessing crops and tending to sick animals."\par
"Though I know 'tis unbecoming of a simple druid to do so, I miss the excitement of our quests together!"\par
"I would gladly join thee, <Gender>, if thou had a use for my skills."\par
join : In party : "Surely I misunderstand thee, <Gender>."\par
"Am I not already a member of thy band?"\par
Not in party : "Gladly, <Gender>!"\par
Party full : "Nay, <Gender>, thou seemst to have enough companions as it is."\par
"Mayhap if one of them left your band, thou might have more need of me."\'b0\par
On a boat : "Let us discuss such matters ashore."\par
"I can barely think out here a'sea!"\par
For the first time, you notice that Jaana seems definitely seasick!\par
leav : In party : "Whatever thou thinkest best, <Gender>."\par
"Thou mayst keep my supplies."\par
Not in party : "Perhaps I misunderstand, <Gender>."\par
"I cannot leave thy party since I am not in it!"\par
On a boat : "Let us discuss such matters ashore."\par
"I can barely think out here a'sea!"\par
For the first time, you notice that Jaana seems definitely seasick!\par
garg : "I know little of the gargoyles, <Gender>, save what rumors I hear."\par
"But I know that the gargoyles are fierce fighters, and a great threat to the land!"\par
ench,nico : "I've heard that Nicodemus the enchanter lives between two rivers."\par
bye : In party : "May the virtues guide us in our quest!"\par
Not in party : "Farewell! Return when thou hast more news of thy quest!"\par
other : "Alas, I know nothing of <Last Input>, <Gender>."\par
-or- : "Beg pardon?"\par
Smith the Horse\par
Introduction : a fine looking horse.\par
Subsequent visits : "Hello again!"\par
Initial visit : "Hello, my name is Smith. Who are you?"\par
"Oh, I had something important to tell you!"\par
"I can't remember what it was, though..."\par
clue : "Oh, that's right, I have a clue for you!"\par
"You're the Warrior of Destiny, right?"\par
"Well, when you go to rescue Lord British from the underworld, be sure to bring his sandlewood box with you!"\par
If Dupre in party : "We went to all that trouble just to hear this?" says Dupre.\par
"We rescued Lord British from the underworld years ago!"\par
"Well, even if you didn't like my clue, it wouldn't kill you to say 'thank you.'"\par
than : "You're welcome."\par
warr,dest,lord,brit,unde,sand,box,resc : "I don't know what it all means; I just know it's important."\par
name : "It's 'Smith', like in 'blacksmith'."\par
blac : "They make my shoes."\par
shoe : "They're nailed to my feet, see?" He holds up a hoof for you to look at.\par
nail,feet : "You should try it. Saves you from looking for your shoes every morning."\par
job : "I eat Iolo's hay to keep it from piling up everywhere and making a mess."\par
If Iolo in party : Iolo winks at you. "And a fine job you do of it, too. I don't know what I'd do without you."\par
eat,hay,pile,mess : "Hay is the greatest menace to the well being of Britannia."\par
"It takes constant vigilance to keep it from engulfing the entire realm."\par
"I've devoted my life to the task."\par
mena,task : It's a thankless job, but I am a determined horse."\par
"Hay, thou hath met thy nemesis, thy doom, and his name is Smith!"\par
bye : "Farewell, two-legger"\par
If Iolo/Dupre in party : You see Iolo give Dupre a nudge in the ribs. "You owe me a drink," he says, grinning.\par
He turns to you. "Sir Know-it-all here bet me that there was no such thing as a talking horse!"\par
"Now I've seen everything. I suppose we'll be inviting some ducks over for tea next."\par
other : "I don't have the answer to everything. I'm just a horse, you know."\par
Sinjen\par
Introduction : a long haired, raggedy man in stocks.\par
name : "I'm Sinjen the warrior."\par
warr : "Well, these days I'm more into stocks."\par
job : "Lenora said I should stay in these stocks for a while and make sure they work properly."\par
stoc,make,sure,work,prop,stay : "I didn't really do anything wrong. I told them to go ahead and put me here anyway, so I could get a different perspective on life."\par
pers : "Normally we stumble around through life on our own. But here I can stand still and watch it go by all around me."\par
life : "The meaning of life? I'm still trying to figure it out myself."\par
leno : "Justice may be a virtue, but I think she carries it too far."\par
just,virt : "I prefer Mandrake's version of the eight virtues."\par
mand,vers,eigh : "You should ask him about it sometime."\par
bye : "Come back and chat again sometime. I'll be right here..."\par
Gargoyle Lands\par
\par
Beh Lem\par
Introduction: a small, light-skinned gargoyle.\par
Initial greeting, not learned Gargish: The gargoyle greets you enthusiastically, but you can't understand him! Seeing your confusion, he switches to the human language. It's obviously a strain for him. "Hello. I little human speak." <Character> speaks. "<Avatar>, let's away from here."\par
"There's naught of use this creature can tell us. Agreed?"\par
yes - The confused gargoyle waves good-bye.\par
no - "As you wish, <Gender>."\par
Subsequent visits, learned Gargish: "To ask how I can help, mighty <Avatar>", Beh Lem asks.\par
name: "No name. I Beh Lem."\par
job: "I wait here. Captain John come."\par
john,capt: "Captain John friend. He come here. I wait here."\par
spea,huma,litt,lang,read: Captain John teach I human speak", the gargoyle says haltingly.\par
other: The gargoyle shrugs.\par
bye: The confused gargoyle waves good-bye.\par
If learned Gargish: Initial visit: "To greet you, human. To recognize you as the False Prophet!"\par
Subsequent visits: "Good <Time of Day>, my friend. \par
To have met Valkadesh yet?"\par
yes - "Good! To know that he very much wanted to speak with you."\par
no - "Oh." The little gargoyle seems saddened.\par
name: "To be called Beh Lem, which means 'just one'. To have not yet received a true name."\par
true: "To not receive a true name until I have proved myself worthy."\par
wort,prov: "To not deserve a name yet. But to get one someday, just like my father Valkadesh!"\par
job: \par
If not in party: "To be here to wait for Captain John."\par
If in party: "To be here to help you, noble <Avatar>."\par
capt,john,frie: "To know Captain John! To help him and Valkedesh in their work", the youngster says proudly.\par
fath,scho,valk: "To very much respect Valkadesh my father." "To want to be a scholar someday just like him!" "To wish to meet Valkadesh?"\par
If Beh Lem not in party: "To go with you and guide you there!"\par
no - "Oh." The little gargoyle seems saddened.\par
yes - \par
"To wish directions to the house of Valkadesh?\par
no - "Then to not understand you."\par
yes - "To go from the entrance to Hythloth westward, following the mountains." "Then to turn north, at the Hall of Knowledge." "To walk east along the mountains until you come to a narrow pass." "To find the house of Valkadesh through the pass!" "To see it at 40 degrees south, 65 degrees east by the sextant." "But to take care! To avoid the lava pits and the Hall of Knowledge!" "To understand these directions?"\par
yes - "Good!"\par
no - "To ask what was unclear?"\par
dire: "To ask what directions were unclear?"\par
moun: "To walk clockwise around the mountains from Hythloth to reach my father's house."\par
hall,know: "To find the Hall of Knowledge to the south of the city."\par
If not spoken to Valkadesh: "To avoid the Hall! To talk to Valkadesh first!"\par
lava,pits: "To be in danger from the lava! To stay far away!"\par
hous: "To find the house of Valkadesh my father through the pass east of the Hall."\par
join,guid: If joins group: The little gargoyle eagerly joins your group.\par
If party full: "To wish very much to join you. But to not have enough room in your party for another." <Character> speaks. "<Avatar>, I'll return to the surface and let everyone know of our progress." During your absence, <Character> decided to head for the surface, to inform Lord British of your progress.\par
sacr: "To not know much about that. But to be sure that Valkadesh would know!"\par
prin: "To be surprised that you don't know that!" "To have three guiding principles: control, diligence, and passion." "To be the basis of all gargoyle beliefs."\par
cont,dili,pass: "To be one of our guiding principles."\par
fals,prop: "To be feared by everybody... everybody except me and Valkadesh, my father!"\par
leav: "To wish to stay with you!" "To not leave until there is peace between our races!"\par
all,ever: Repeat directions:\par
other: "To know nothing about that." "To be young. To think you should ask someone older." "To truly wish I could help you with that." "To not understand what you mean by <Last Input>." "To not have enough experience to answer that."\par
bye: "May (your/our) persistence and precision lead to success!"\par
Valkadesh\par
Introduction: a tall, thin, winged gargoyle.\par
If not learned Gargish: "I human friend. Walk talk you."\par
frie: "Captain John gargoyle friend. Captain John speak."\par
capt,john: "Must Captain John go. Only he speak. Must go!"\par
other: "In a thick accent, the gargoyle croaks, "I bad with human language." "With Captain John must to speak."\par
bye: "Want much to talk." "Captain John speak; Captain John go!"\par
Initial visit, if learned Gargish: "To offer greetings, False Prophet." "To have waited long for you to return to this side of the world." "To believe that the Book of Prophecies is wrong." "To believe that I can reason with you, persuade you to spare my people." "To wish to address you honorably: to ask your name?"\par
"Noble '<Given Name>, to see that you are a being of honor and respect." "To not betray that honor: to return the Codex!" "To save my people from the prophecy!"\par
Subsequent visits: "To hope your travels have brought you wisdom?"\par
yes - "To wish to hear about it!"\par
no - "To regret that, and to wish to aid you."\par
If submitted: "Greetings, friend '<Avatar>." "To see you have done the honorable thing." "To have earned much respect from my people by doing this!"\par
name: "To be called Valkadesh Wis-lem, Valkadesh the Scholar." "To have been given a partial name. To have yet to achieve full honor."\par
part,full,hono: "To be greatly honored by even a partial name." "To be customary among my people to give names only to those most worthy."\par
job: "To be a Scholar. To be seeking a way to avert the prophecy."\par
prop: "To be written in the Book of Prophecies that you would destroy our world." "To also be written that only the sacrifice of the False Prophet would save us."\par
sacr: "To be the only alternative to returning the Codex." "Without the Codex, to have no choice but to sacrifice your life!"\par
code: "To believe that it is not too late." "To beg you to return the Codex." "Avert the prophecy! Save your life, and my people's lives as well!"\par
choi: "Wait! To know that sacrifice has three meanings: of self, of others and of valuables." "Perhaps to find a better answer in one of those other meanings."\par
find,answ: "To be unable to help more." "To suggest you seek out Naxatilor himself for further enlightenment."\par
naxa,seer: "To learn much from Naxatilor, the wisest gargoyle." "To find his chambers just to the northeast of the Hall of Knowledge." "To suggest you go there and ask him of sacrifice."\par
bye:\par
If not surrendered: As you turn to leave, the gargoyle stops you. "Wait", he calls. "To be feared and hated by all gargoyles." "To be unsafe for you right now, False Prophet." "To surrender is only answer." "To surrender to Inquisitor." "Then to be no longer a threat, and then not to be feared by my people!" "To surrender to the Inquisitor, and then to be free to look for the solution."\par
If surrendered: "May your precision and persistence lead to success!"\par
surr:\par
If not surrendered: "To travel to the Inquisitor." "To tell the Inquisitor that you surrender." "Then to be no longer a threat, and no longer be feared."\par
If surrendered: "To have done the honorable thing and now be respected and unfeared by my people."\par
drax,lead,inqu: "To go to Draxinusom, the Inquisitor and leader of my race." "To find his chambers just to the northwest of the Hall of Knowledge." "To surrender to him, that you may travel freely in our land."\par
free: "To know that the moons are not properly aligned yet for the ritual." "To assure you that you will not be sacrificed for many weeks." "To assure you further that surrender is the only way you can travel among my people."\par
other: "To be confused by your accent." "To ask what <Last Input> means?"\par
Draxinusom\par
Introduction: a large, winged gargoyle of regal bearing.\par
Not learned Gargish, not submitted: The gargoyle screams, "An-bal-sil-fer! Klep lem! Por-aylem ter-ort ka!"\par
Learned Gargish, with Beh Lem: "To refrain from slaying you only because of the presence of the child, False Prophet!"\par
Intial visit: "To express astonishment at your audacity, False Prophet!"\par
Subsequent visits: "To demand to know why you have returned here, False Prophet!"\par
Learned Gargish, submitted: "To be honored by your presence, noble <Avatar>. To feel sorrow that matters of state prevent conversation." "To summon you when proper time for your sacrifice has come."\par
name: "To be named Draxinusom, leader of our race."\par
If not submitted: "To demand to know why you have come before me!"\par
job: "To be the leader of our race. To have little time to waste chatting with the False Prophet!"\par
surr,sacr"To be here to surrender?"\par
yes - "To be willing to die to save my people?"\par
no - "To grow impatient with your babbling!"\par
"To grant me your life?"\par
yes - "Why?"\par
"To ignore the rhetoric of the False Prophet!" "To warn you of imminent attack!"\par
seer,scho,sacr,talk,valk,naxa: The gargoyle shows you a crystal amulet dangling from a leather cord. "Hsss....To consent to wear this?"\par
no - "Begone, False Prophet! To seize you for sacrifice the instant my army returns from the Underworld!"\par
yes:\par
If Dupre in party: Trusted Dupre whispers frantically to you, "You mustn't! It's some sort of magical trap!" The gargoyle waits impatiently for an answer. "Yes or no, False Prophet?"\par
no - "To be necessary for surrender! To ask again for your acceptance of this."\par
yes - "To be suspicious of thy motives..."\par
<Your answer> The gargoyle hands you the amulet, and you slip the leather loop over your head. "To surprise me with the nobility of your deed. To no longer be a threat to my people." "To bid you to travel among my people, talk to them, learn our ways." "To inform you when the time of your sacrifice has come."\par
bye: "Flee, False Prophet! To seize you for sacrifice the instant my army returns from the Underworld!"\par
If not submitted: "To have known it all along!" "To be a fool for trusting the False Prophet for a moment!"\par
Naxatilor\par
Introduction: a dark, rough-skinned gargoyle.\par
Learned Gargish, not submitted: The venerable gargoyle does not acknowledge your presence. "To have nothing to say to you, False Prophet!"\par
Learned Gargish, submitted: \par
Initial visit: "To greet you, <Avatar>, Avatar of the Underworld." "To see the Amulet of Submission around your neck." "To consider your acceptance of this both noble and wise."\par
Subsequent visits: "To greet you again, <Avatar>."\par
If karma low: "To observe by your aura that such honorable deeds are rare for you." "To not be surprised, then, that you are fated to destroy a world."\par
If karma medium: "To observe by your aura that you are not a being of evil." "To regret for your sake, then, that you are fated to destroy a world."\par
If karma high: "To observe by your aura that you are truly a being of honor." "To be surprised, then, that you are fated to destroy a world."\par
name: "To be called Naxatilor."\par
job: "To be a seer, mystic advisor to my people." "But to be unable to avert what is written in the Book of Prophecies."\par
fate,dest,worl: "To have wreaked great havoc in this land by your theft of the Codex!" "To have no choice but to return it!"\par
scho,valk: "To have spoken to Scholar Valkadesh?" "Then surely to know what harm you have caused my world!" "To have no choice but to return the Codex!"\par
choi,retu: "To see only two alternatives: to return the Codex, or to give up your life."\par
code: "To know not where the Codex is." "But to remember that Captain Bolesh just returned from the Codex!" "To suggest you seek him. To try the healer's house to the north."\par
sacr: "Hss...Yes, to know of the three meanings of that word." "To ask to which type of sacrifice you refer: self, others or items of value?"\par
self: To admire your willingness to sacrifice your life for the good of my people." "But to doubt that that is the meaning of the prophecy."\par
othe: "What?!" "To suggest that you can atone for your misdeed by bathing in the blood of others?!"\par
If karma low: "To find such thoughts well in keeping with the blackness of your aura!"\par
If karma high: "To find such thoughts unworthy of your honorable aura!"\par
valu,item: "To know of only one item of true value: the Codex itself." "Surely not to destroy the Codex!?"\par
yes - "To be utterly without hope in the face of such ignorance." "To refuse to converse with a daemon."\par
no - "Perhaps to have another alternative..." "Yes! To return the Codex to the Vortex!" "To then be available to both our peoples!"\par
both,peop: "To be able to see the Vortex from both sides of the world!" "To benefit both races equally if the Codex is returned there!"\par
vort,ritu,retu: "To direct you to go to the Hall of Knowledge, south of here." "There to read the Book of Ritual." "There also to get the Vortex Lens!" "Then to return here, where I will tell you what must be done!"\par
hall,know: "To find the Vortex Lens in the Hall of Knowledge, south of here."\par
lens: \par
If don't have lens: "To require the Vortex Lens, foolish human!" "To waste no more time!" "To go to the Hall of Knowledge and get the lens!" "To bring it to me personally, Avatar!"\par
If have broken lens: "Yes, to see that the Vortex Lens is no longer whole." "To go to the lensmaker, whose house is northeast of here." "To get the lens repaired there!" "Then to return here with the whole lens!"\par
If have fixed lens: "Good, to see that you have the Vortex Lens." "To have read the Book of Ritual as well?"\par
no - "Then to go to the Hall of Knowledge and do so!"\par
yes - "Good. To be unable to reverse the ritual myself." "But to know that the Codex itself will say how to return it to the Vortex." "To know also that you will need a second lens." "To require a human-crafted lens, so that your people may also see the Codex."\par
lens,huma,seco: "To be sure to show the human lensmaker the Vortex Lens." "Also to be sure to tell the human lensmaker that his lens must be concave!" "To be most important: concave!"\par
other: To have no time to discuss that."\par
bye: \par
If sent to Hall of Knowledge: "Farewell! To return when you have visited the Hall of Knowledge!"\par
If not sent to Hall of Knowledge: "Farewell, <Avatar>. To return when there is more we can discuss."\par
Caretaker\par
Introduction: an old, winged gargoyle. An odd device crafted of glass and metal rests upon his face.\par
Not submitted: The gargoyle ignores you and continues writing.\par
Submitted: "Yes? To inquire about the reason for (yet another/this) interruption."\par
name: "To be called the Caretaker, in lieu of a name." "To be honored by being allowed to perform my duties as caretaker of this Hall."\par
job,dut,care: "To care for my race's artifacts that rest here in the Hall of Knowledge."\par
hall,know: "To keep the treasured artifacts of our race here in this Hall, in the three chambers."\par
cham,vort,libr,huma: "To have three rooms here:" "To keep artifacts from the Underworld in the Human Chamber, to the east." "To keep valuable books in the Librum Chamber, to the west." "And to keep the Cube and the Lens in the Vortex Chamber, to the south."\par
unde: "Yes, the Underworld. To believe you know it as 'Britannia'."\par
book,ritu: "To find what you seek in the Librum Chamber."\par
lens: "To find what you seek in the Vortex Chamber."\par
cube: "To regret that that item is lost, stolen by human thieves years ago." "To have heard the humans mention the name Stonegate as they fled." "To have heard them say they would sail through Lost Hope Bay." "To know nothing more about its whereabouts."\par
ston,gate: "To suspect it to be someplace in the human-filled Underworld."\par
code: "To suppose that you are making a joke." "To know as well as you that you took the Codex to your side of the world!"\par
temp,sing: "To not be a signpost!" "To find the Temple of Singularity in the mountains to the north... if you can fly!"\par
fly: "To be unable to reach the mountain-locked Temple of Singularity on foot." "To only be able to reach that holy place if you are a winged gargoyle." "To find this most fitting and proper." "To see no reason to let human riff-raff into the Temple."\par
moon: "To admit ignorance regarding the location of the moonstones."\par
other: "To lack any time for idle chatter." "To desire you to get to the point and then depart."\par
bye: "Without another word, the gargoyle returns to his work.\par
Lensmaker\par
Introduction: a very old gargoyle.\par
Not learned Gargish, not submitted: The gargoyle gasps in terror and wheezes, "An-bal-sil-fer!" Then he faints dead away!\par
Learned Gargish, not submitted: The gargoyle gasps in terror and wheezes, "The False Prophet!" Then he faints dead away!\par
Learned Gargish, submitted: \par
Initial visit: The venerable gargoyle peers at you. "Greetings, False Prophet." "To have been told by Naxatilor, long ago, that the you would one day come to me, wearing the Amulet of Submission." "To never have believed it would come to pass." "To ask what service I can perform?"\par
Subsequent visits: "To ask how again I may help you?"\par
If tasked to retrieve broken Gargoyle lens: "To wonder why you have not brought back the broken lens?!" "To have already told you that I need it in order to craft a new one!" "To ask what you think I can do without it?"\par
name: "To lack a name, of course." "But to be called Lor-wis-lem, the scholar of light, by many learned gargoyles." As he says this, the ancient gargoyle beams with pride.\par
job: "To craft the finest lenses in the land", the gargoyle says proudly. "Also to teach my young apprentices not to cut themselves on the glass!"\par
teac,youn,appr: "To be nearing the end of my time." "To have one last sacred duty:" "To pass on my skill to the next generation."\par
end,time: "To be over a thousand years old." "To seem a mere youth compared to Naxatilor, however."\par
naxa: "To have helped Naxatilor create the Vortex Lens, centuries ago." "To have found him venerable and ancient even then!"\par
vort,lens: \par
If not have broken Gargoyle lens: "To remember little from so long ago", the gargoyle croaks. "To require the pieces of the lens in order to make a new copy."\par
If have broken Gargoyle lens: "To see the shattered Vortex Lens you carry." "To remember making it, so very long ago." Taking the shards of glass, the lensmaker turns to his grinding table. In a short while, he has crafted a new Vortex Lens! "To have far greater skill now than when first I made this lens", he says smugly. "To require little time to repair it." He hands you the restored Vortex Lens.\par
other: To be old. To suggest you ask that of others."\par
bye: "To be honored to have helped you, False Prophet."\par
Bolesh\par
Introduction: a strong, winged gargoyle warrior. He is sorely wounded.\par
Not learned Gargish, not submitted: The gargoyle struggles to sit up. He shouts, "An-bal-sil-fer! Agra-lem! Agra-lem!" The gargoyle collapses, exhausted.\par
Learned Gargish, not submitted: The gargoyle struggles to sit up. He shouts, "The False Prophet! Guards! Guards!" The gargoyle collapses, outraged but exhausted.\par
Learned Gargish, submitted: The gargoyle struggles to sit up. "The False Prophet!" "But to wear the Amulet of Submission?" "Then to express awe at your honor and courage." "Greetings again, honored one."\par
name: To be named Bolesh Us-agra-lem, Bolesh the Troop-Leader."\par
job,lead: "To lead what remains of our forces into battle." "To have recently returned from a mission to your side of the world." "To have tried to reach the Codex."\par
code: "To have had victory between our claws, but to have been thwarted on the verge of success!" "To have encountered an impervious force field around the Codex."\par
forc,fiel: "To know that such a field surrounded the Codex when my people possessed it." "To remember that only those on sacred quests for wisdom could pass."\par
sacr,ques: "To receive a sacred quest at the Temple of Singularity." "But to be uncertain whether a human's request would be answered there."\par
temp,sing: "To find the temple in the mountains to the north." "To need to fly to get there, though!"\par
fly: "Yes, to be accessible only to the superior winged gargoyles." "To be totally unreachable by land-bound worker gargoyles!" "To suppose that it is totally unreachable by land-bound humans as well."\par
other: Weakly, the gargoyle says, "What?"\par
bye: "Farewell, False Prophet." "To honor my people with your sacrifice."\par
Healer (Gargoyle)\par
Introduction: a somber and calm gargoyle.\par
Not learned Gargish, not submitted: "An in mani lem, An-bal-sil-fer." The gargoyle says nothing else.\par
Learned Gargish, not submitted: "To be unwilling to help you, False Prophet." "To be a healer, a being of peace." "Elsewise, to summon the guards to slay you!" The gargoyle says nothing else.\par
Learned Gargish, submitted: \par
Initial Visit: "To see the amulet, the symbol of your courage and nobility." "To wish to help you however I can."\par
Subsequent visits: "To be happy to see you again, noble one." "But to be sad that you seek my services."\par
name: "To be nameless, being only a healer."\par
job: "To be entrusted with the tasks of healing those wounded and curing those sick." "To do this for all, as a service to society."\par
heal,cure: If not at shop: "To ask that you see me at my shop."\par
If at shop, healthy: "To be unfamiliar with human anatomy..." "But to be certain that you/all of you are well!"\par
First time healed at Gargoyles: "To drink this and be healthy." Do you/Does <Character> drink it?\par
no - The gargoyle shrugs. "To assure you that it is safe and invigorating." "But not to force anyone to act against their will."\par
yes - You/<Character> drink(s) the potion and feel(s) deathly ill/slightly dizzy. "To apologize for the error! But to know exactly what I did wrong." The gargoyle mixes a different drink that somehow smells worse than the last.\par
Subsequent times healed at Gargoyles: "Which of you?" The gargoyle mixes strange powders into a foul-smelling brew.\par
Heal message: You/<Character> drink(s) the potion and feel(s) restored! "To ask if there is aught else I can do for you?"\par
resu,dead: "To ask me to raise the dead?" "To apologize, but that is beyond my power." "To doubt that anyone can do that!"\par
good: "The goodscrafter? To regret his condition." "To know that he is in great pain after the loss of his family."\par
fami: "To know that his family was lost when the edges of the world fell off." "But to have less and less patience for his dispassionate self-pity."\par
fell,off: "Yes, during the cataclysms." "To have lost friends myself during that bad time." "But to maintain the struggle for life diligently!"\par
other: "To be a healer, dedicated only to my job. To know nothing about <Last Input>."\par
bye: "May fortune prevent the need for your return!"\par
Goodscrafter\par
Introduction: a quiet, listless gargoyle.\par
Not learned Gargish, not submitted: "An-bal-sil-fer", the gargoyle says calmly. "Sum in-korp i. Vers." The gargoyle silently awaits his fate.\par
Learned Gargish, not submitted: "Oh, the False Prophet", the gargoyle says calmly. "To suppose that you have come to kill me as well. All right."\par
Learned Gargish, submitted: \par
Initial visit: "To see the Amulet of Submission." "To suppose, then, that my world has been saved." "But to feel that salvation has come too late."\par
Subsequent visits: "To ask why you disturb me again, False Prophet."\par
name: "To not have a name." "To have nothing at all now..."\par
job: "To be a goodscrafter." "Though to have no reason to make goods now."\par
good,buy: "To invite you to take what you want."\par
too,late: "To refuse to discuss my grief with the being who caused it."\par
grie: "Surely to know what pain you have caused by stealing the Codex?" "To not believe that you care. To believe, in fact, that you enjoy causing suffering."\par
suff,no,help: "To not believe that you would do anything to help."\par
fami: "To have lost my entire family in the cataclysms."\par
cata: "To wish not to speak of it."\par
other: To not care about <Last Input>." "To not care about anything now."\par
bye: "To wait here for you to return to kill me."\par
\par
Weaponsmith\par
Introduction: a young, nervous-looking gargoyle.\par
Not learned Gargish, not submitted: "An-bal-sil-fer!" the gargoyle screams. "Agra-lem! Agra-Lem!" Suddenly realizing that he is holding a weapon, the gargoyle attacks!\par
Learned Gargish, not submitted: "The False Prophet!" the gargoyle screams. "Guards! Guards!"\par
Learned Gargish, submitted: \par
Initial visit: "The False Prophet!" "To thank you for your upcoming sacrifice." "To greatly respect your nobility and courage."\par
Subsequent visits: "To ask how I can help you, noble one."\par
name: "To be but a simple weaponsmith, False Prophet." "To lack a name, as is appropriate for my station."\par
job,weap,mast,work: "To be the master weaponsmith now, although to have but recently been a simple apprentice."\par
appr: "To greatly regret the loss of my master, killed during the disasters." "But to carry on in the face of adversity." "And certainly not to lose all passion for life, like the worthless goodscrafter!"\par
disa: "Yes, surely to know of the disasters?" "To have only barely survived the earthquakes after the Codex disappeared."\par
good: "To consider him a discredit to the race!" "Most of all, to consider him a dishonor to my late master!"\par
dish: To cheapen all our loss, all our grief, by his self-pity." "To have lost my master, like a father to me." "Yet to maintain control, to maintain diligence." "Most of all to maintain passion for life." "To feel that the goodscrafter dishonors us all by abandoning our principles." "To feel that the goodscrafter needs a trip to the catacombs."\par
cata: "Yes, to have visited them myself once, long ago." "To find there shrines to our three principles: control, passion and diligence." "To speak with these shrines and meditate, to receive new insight." "To not remember where the catacombs are." "To be sent there by the Temple of Singularity."\par
temp,sing: "To find that to the north, in the mountains." "To advise you to find some way to fly if you wish to get there, though!"\par
fly: "To be unable to reach the Temple on foot; to be forced to fly over the mountains."\par
buy,sell: "To not understand what that means." "To create these items for the use of all."\par
all: "To give these wares to any gargoyle who has need of them." "To invite you to look around at my wares as well." "To ask if any of them interest you?"\par
ware: "To have but a few items available." "To be far less adept than my former master."\par
armo,helm,belt: "To see little of interest in that item."\par
boom: \par
If not at shop: "To ask you to see me at my shop!"\par
If at shop, not have boomerang: "Ah, to see you admire these boomerangs, the work of my master." "To regret being unable to create boomerangs myself." "To have only a few left in stock, but to offer you one." Do you accept the gift?\par
yes, but already given boomerang - The gargoyle nods. "Yes, to see that you already have enough weapons."\par
yes, if Shamino in party - As you take the boomerang, Shamino speaks. "Aye, 'tis a most interesting weapon, <Name>." "Perhaps when our quest is through I can study its use."\par
yes, if Shamino not in party - The gargoyle hands you a boomerang.\par
no - The gargoyle speaks. "To ask if anything else interests you?" If already given boomerang: "To wish I had more boomerangs, that I might give you another."\par
zu,ylem: \par
If not at shop: "To ask that you see me at my shop!"\par
If never given dust: "Yes, to be a very interesting weapon." "To knock out even a large animal with just a single pouch of this powder!" "To be used most often by hunters, to avoid harming the meat." "Unfortunately, to make this powder from plants that can no longer be found." "Here, to offer you one." Do you accept the gift?\par
yes - He hands you a small pouch. "To hope you find it useful."\par
no - The gargoyle nods. "To understand your reluctance." "To know the dangers of zu ylem dust to the untrained user." If already give zu ylem dust: "To regret that I have such a small supply of zu ylem dust."\par
plan: "To create the zu ylem dust from plants that can no longer be found." "But to know of far worse effects of the disasters."\par
snak,veno,silv: "To be a powerful but dangerous drug!" "To turn gargoyle warriors into unstoppable fighters!" "But to always be fatal after the battle ends." "To be created by the snake charmer, who lives to the southwest."\par
char: "Yes, to suggest you visit him if you are interested." "To find the snake-summoning horn a most impressive sight!"\par
join: "To wish I could leave on adventures..." "But to be dedicated to my important work."\par
other: "To know nothing of <Last Input>, being but a simple weaponsmith."\par
bye: "May your long work and strength lead to success!"\par
Foodmaker\par
Introduction: a large and boisterous gargoyle. He carries a 'knife' large enough to be a sword!\par
If not learned Gargish: "An-bal-sil-fer!" the gargoyle shouts. "Gres por! Gres por!"\par
If learned Gargish, not submitted: "The False Prophet!" the gargoyle shouts. "Begone, begone!"\par
If learned Gargish, submitted: Initial visit: "The False Prophet!"\par
Subsequent visits: "To welcome you back, False Prophet!" "To welcome you to my place of cooking." "To offer you the best food in all the world!"\par
name: "To be called Foodmaker, not having a name yet." "But to be the finest cook in the land!" "To receive a name someday soon for my skill!"\par
job: "To cook and serve food for all the gargoyles who live in these parts!" "Also to guide and instruct the wingless ones in cooking chores."\par
wing: "To have to watch their every move!" "But to acknowledge that they are vital to our society."\par
food: \par
If not at shop: "To not have food on me. To have you visit my shop."\par
If at shop: "Yes, yes! To offer you this finely roasted meat!" With a few strokes of his huge knife, the gargoyle cuts you a slice of meat. Do you take the meat?\par
yes - You/Your party eat/eats the profferred food. The flavor is unlike anything you've had before.\par
If Iolo in party: Iolo speaks. "I wonder what sort of meat this is, <Avatar>." \par
The gargoyle beams with pride. "To ask you: Is it not the best meat you have ever eaten?"\par
Half-jokingly, Iolo says, "We'd better do as he says." "After all, we don't know what kind of meat that is!"\par
hors,meat: "To be famous among all gargoyles for the quality of my horseflesh!"\par
wine,bunc,grap,plan: "Well, yes, of course to have that as well." "But to be famous for my roast horseflesh!" "To offer you some of this fine food!"\par
good: "The goodscrafter? To be pathetic!" the huge gargoyle scowls. "To have self-pity, when strength and long work will give success!" "To wish to hear no more about that creature."\par
other: "To not know what <Last Input> is." "But to gladly cook it for you if you tell me the recipe!"\par
bye: "To welcome you to come back when you are hungry again!" "Wait!" "To give you some fine horseflesh to take with you on your trip!" Do you accept his gift?\par
yes - The chef gives you # horse chop/s.\par
no - "Well then, to save it here for you!"\par
Farmer Krill\par
Introduction: a large, healthy-looking winged gargoyle.\par
If not learned Gargish: The gargoyle screams, "An-bal-sil-fer! Des-lem, klep lem!"\par
If learned Gargish, not submitted: The gargoyle screams, "The False Prophet! Workers, attack!"\par
If learned Gargish, submitted: \par
Initial visit: "To note that you wear the Amulet of Submission." "To admire your courage and to appreciate your sacrifice." "To ask your name, that I may address you in a noble manner?" "To greet you, <Given Name>."\par
Subsequent visits: "Good <Time of Day>, noble <Avatar>. To be pleased by your return!"\par
name: "To be named Krill Us-arb-vas-lem, Krill the Leader of Farmers."\par
job: "To lead the wingless ones, the worker gargoyles who tend these fields." "To have great fortune in my harvests!"\par
good,harv,fort,cont,clea,dire: "To receive bountiful harvests thanks to the efforts of my well-directed workers." "To feed my workers far better than misguided Farmer Nash to the east does."\par
nash: "To be ashamed that Nash lacks common sense." "To be appalled by his uncontrolled heart and undirected mind." "To point out his unproductive fields as an example of why the wingless ones need firm guidance."\par
lead,firm,guid,dire: "To be forced by necessity to give the wingless ones no room for choice or freedom."\par
room,choi,free: "To acknowledge that it may seem harsh, but to assure you that there is no other way to treat the wingless ones." "To receive good harvests only through firm control and clear direction."\par
wing: "To consider them valuable members of society who need firm control and strong leadership." "To explain that they are far less intelligent than you or I."\par
Beh: "Beh Lem? To be but a child. To someday grow wings just like his father, Scholar Valkadesh."\par
valk: "To admire the wisdom of Scholar Valkadesh, but to consider his studies unseemly."\par
stud: "To abhor his continued study of the accursed humans!" The gargoyle pauses, embarrassed. "To mean no offense to you, <Avatar>." "To acknowledge the nobility of your sacrifice." "To consider you a great credit to your race!"\par
other: "To not understand what you mean." "To ask what you mean by <Last Input>?"\par
bye: "To have greatly enjoyed this conversation, noble <Avatar>."\par
Farmer Nash\par
Introduction: a gaunt, tired-looking winged gargoyle.\par
If not learned Gargish: "The gargoyle screams, "An-bal-sil-fer! Des-lem, klep lem!"\par
If learned Gargish, not submitted: "The gargoyle screams, "The False Prophet! Workers, attack!"\par
If learned Gargish, submitted: \par
Initial visit: "To be amazed!" "To greatly admire your nobility, False Prophet." "To honor my people with your sacrifice!" "To ask your name, that I may address you as you deserve?" "To be honored by your visit, <Given Name>"\par
Subsequent visits: "Good <Time of Day>, noble <Avatar>. To be honored by another visit!"\par
name: "To be named Nash Us-arb-vas-lem, Nash the Leader of Farmers."\par
job: "To lead the wingless ones, the worker gargoyles who tend these fields." "But to have little fortune in my harvests."\par
lead: "To try to give the wingless ones free reign, but to be forced to guide them in their work."\par
wing,free: "To be far kinder to the wingless ones than most of my kind." "To feel that the wingless ones should not be enslaved simply because they lack our intelligence."\par
harv,fort: "To be forced, on occasion, to tend the fields myself because of the harshness of the times." "To wish my fields were as productive as those of Farmer Krill, my neighbor to the west."\par
kril: "To be ashamed that Farmer Krill treats his workers so harshly." "To be appalled by his lack of concern for their thoughts and feelings."\par
other: "To confess difficulty in understanding your accent. To inquire what <Last Input> means?"\par
bye: "To have been greatly honored by this conversation, noble <Avatar>."\par
Snake Charmer\par
Introduction: an old winged gargoyle.\par
Not learned Gargish, not submitted: The gargoyle shouts, "An-bal-sil-fer!" and flees!\par
Learned Gargish, not submitted: The gargoyle shouts, "The False Prophet!" and flees!\par
Learned Gargish, submitted: \par
Initial visit: The gargoyle seems afraid of you at first. Then he notices the amulet around your neck. "To... to feel honored to address you, False Prophet." "To ask what you wish of a simple snakecharmer?"\par
Subsequent visits: "To feel honored by your visit, False Prophet."\par
name: "The gargoyle laughs nervously. "To lack a name, of course. "To be called simply by my job, snakecharmer."\par
job: "To summon the silver snake, and to direct the young warriors in defeating it." "Then to extract the venom so that I can make the battle-drug."\par
veno,batt,drug: "To make the drug for our bravest warriors, who take it and turn into fighting daemons!" "To express sorrow that the drug is fatal, but to express awe and respect for the warriors' sacrifice."\par
snak,silv,summ,char: "To use the great horn to summon the silver snake." "To always require many warriors to defeat the creature!"\par
horn: "To find the horn just north of my house." "But to warn you never to blow the horn!" "To be in grave peril from the snake without a squad of warriors!"\par
other: "To be but a simple snake charmer, unfamiliar with matters such as that."\par
bye: "To express my thanks for the sacrifice you have chosen to make!"\par
Other\par
\par
Sutek\par
Introduction : a white-haired mage in flowing robes with a mad gleam in his eye.\par
"Get out! Flee before the awesome wrath of the mad mage Sutek!"\par
Subsequent visits : "What brings you back to disturb the musings of the mad mage Sutek again?"\par
Initial visit : "So, Avatar, you disturb the musings of the mad mage Sutek!"\par
"What wisdom dost thou seek?"\par
name : "The name Sutek strikes fear in the hearts of mere mortals!"\par
"Everyone knows the name of Sutek the Mad!"\par
job : "Sutek the Mad is the greatest mage the land has ever known!"\par
ball : "Balloonist? Yes, Sutek remembers him."\par
"He died in Sutek's catacombs, like most of the others who have ever worked for Sutek!"\par
mad : "Yes! Sutek is mad!"\par
"They say there is a fine line between genius and madness."\par
"Well, Sutek hops up and down on that line, cursing the fools that surround him!"\par
cata : "Sutek hired many brilliant engineers to build the catacombs that lie beneath his castle."\par
"The catacombs are filled with the bones of those engineers!"\par
"The Pushme-Pullyu knows where all such bones can be found!"\par
push,pull : "Sutek created the Pushme-Pullyu as a test for fools!"\par
"If you can pass the test, you will learn what you wish to know!"\par
bye : "What?!"\par
"Sutek grants thou a piece of wisdom to take to thy grave, and thou refusest it?"\par
"Then thou must die!"\par
"How darest thou leave the presence of Sutek the Mad before he has dissmissed you?!"\par
"If thou art so rude, then I banish thee from my presence!"\par
"Begone, and pester Sutek no further!"\par
other : "Yes, Sutek knows all about <Last Input>."\par
"But he won't tell you!"\par
"Only a fool would disturb Sutek with frivolous matters such as that!"\par
"Thy question is answered."\par
"Now flee before the awesome wrath of the mad mage Sutek!"\par
"Even the Avatar acknowledges the power and wisdom of Sutek!"\par
"Don't you, <Gender>?"\par
yes-"Good."\par
no-"No?! Then you must die!"\par
"Dost thou seek employment with Sutek the Mad?"\par
yes-"Well, too bad! Sutek isn't hiring today!"\par
no-"No?!"\par
"What sort of fool passes up the opportunity to work for the greatest genius of this age?"\par
"Such fools must die!"\par
"But Sutek is mad, and so he will grant you one last nugget of wisdom before thy death!"\par
"What wouldst thou like to know?"\par
Pushme Pullyu\par
Introduction : a bizarre, two-headed beast. Both heads take turns speaking to you.\par
"Stand over here!"\par
"Stand over there!"\par
"Come hear our puzzle anywhere!"\par
name : "Should I answer you today? If asked tomorrow, I would say..."\par
"That my partner and I are the Pushme Pullyu, and speaking in riddles is what we do."\par
"But which is Pullyu, and which is Pushme? If you'd asked yesterday, I'd have told thee!"\par
push : "If you asked my partner, thinking him wise, he'd tell you the Pushme always lies!"\par
pull : "If you asked my partner, then forsooth, he'd say the Pullyu always speaks truth!"\par
ly,lie,fals : "My partner lies, and that is true. It is because he's the Pullyu!"\par
tru : "I'll always tell the truth to thee. That's because I am the Pushme!"\par
job,ridd,puzz : "If my partner said you should go west, then he would be a lying pest!"\par
"If my partner said you should go east, then he would be a lying beast!"\par
"If my partner said 'Go east.' to you, then he'd have said that which is true."\par
"If my partner said to you 'Go west.', then his advice would be the best."\par
east,west : "If you asked my partner which was best, he'd say 'East lie beasts, so go quest west.'"\par
bye : "So soon to leave?"\par
"You'd leave so soon?"\par
"Take three blind mice, a dish and spoon!"\par
"And if, perhaps, you've solved our riddle,"\par
"Then go dance with the cat and fiddle!"\par
Both heads smile innocently at you.\par
If Dupre in party : Dupre is staring at them, his jaw hanging wide open.\par
If Iolo in party : Iolo says "That's got to be the most baffling thing I've ever heard."\par
other : "Is that a lie, or is it true?" "Could we be more confused than you?"\par
Gorn\par
Introduction : a burly barbarian warrior.\par
If in party : "Vy talk ven dere's fighting to do?"\par
Subsequent visits : "Ho, Avatar, thou hast returned!"\par
Initial visit : "Hail, <Avatar Name>! I haf heard of thy deeds, Avatar!"\par
name : "I be named Gorn, <Gender>."\par
job : If in party : "I follow thee, <Gender>. I haf no other job now."\par
If not in party : "I be a fighter, a homeless vanderer."\par
"Here I vait until I find somevun else to trafel mit."\par
traf,trav : If in party : "Ya, I like to trafel!"\par
If not in party : "Much vould I like to vander again, but I haf no vun to trafel mit now." "Somevun vill ask me to join mit them zooner or later."\par
join : If in party : "I don't understand, <Gender>. Vat do you mean, <Last Input>?"\par
If not in party : "I vould be much happy to join mit thee, <Gender>\par
If on boat : "but ve are at sea!"\par
If party full : "but I dislike such large groups."\par
If already in party : "und I already haf!"\par
leav : If not in party : "But I vas here first, ya?"\par
If on boat : "Ask ven ve land, okay?"\par
If in party, not on boat : "Ok, if that's vat you vant. Maybe I'll zee you later."\par
"You keep all zis stuff meanwhile, ya?"\par
bye : "It is alvays a pleasure to talk mit thee, <Gender>."\par
sute : "Sutek is mad."\par
"He is very dangerous."\par
"I vould avoid him if I vere thee."\par
"But he does know many tings, und is sometimes helpful."\par
other : If in party : "I am just a simple varrior, <Gender>, and know nothing about <Last Input>."\par
If not in party : "Surely zere are others who vould know more about <Last Input> than I, <Gender>."\par
Zoltan\par
Introduction : a lively soul of a gypsy, with a bit of a wild look to him.\par
If mean to Kador : "Anyone who would mistreat a dog has no business with Zoltan."\par
If don't pay Zoltan for dance : "Hah! You again! You are no friend to Zoltan."\par
"I dance for you, and how do you repay me?"\par
"Perhaps a few coins might ease the sting of your insult."\par
Do you give him any money?\par
no-"So be it. Leave me before I place a gypsy curse on you!"\par
Initial visit : "Huzzah! I am Zoltan, king of the gypsies!"\par
Subsequent visits : "Huzzah! I am still Zoltan, king of the gypsies!"\par
name,job : "As I said, I am Zoltan, king of the gypsies!"\par
zolt : "Yes, Zoltan, king of the gypsies!"\par
king : "I have no lands nor castles, as most rulers do. Nay, for I am the king of the open road."\par
artu : "Arturos? Never heard of him."\par
duck : He licks his lips and smiles. "A duck? No, haven't seen any around here."\par
land,cast : "You cannot tie a gypsy down to a single place."\par
"We are free spirits, and must roam like the wind throughout the land."\par
road : "The roads wander everywhere, just like a gypsy!"\par
wind : "The four winds - they are gypsies too!"\par
roam,wand : "As a gypsy's body wanders, so does his mind."\par
"Just now I am thinking of what you might buy from me today."\par
free,spir : "Aye, my spirit is free, but my advice is not."\par
gyps : "Ask my people for advice, or what they have to sell."\par
"Gypsies see and hear much, and occasionally happen across items of interest..."\par
advi : "Tell you what. Since I'm in a good mood, I'll only charge you two gold coins. Is it a deal?"\par
no-"Whatever you say."\par
yes, not enough gold-"Come back when you're not so down on your luck."\par
yes, enough gold-"I'll tell you this:"\par
"Powder kegs are useful for persuading uncooperative doors to open."\par
silv,tabl : "I'd be glad to help you out. But 'tis a hard life, sometimes, being a gypsy."\par
"You'd be willing to pay ten gold for the information, would you?"\par
no-"Let me know if you change your mind."\par
yes, no gold-"Come back when you have the money."\par
yes, have gold-"Some gorgio called 'Captain John' brought us the silver tablet and paid us to take it to the Lycaeum."\par
"While we were on the way there, we were ambushed by Captain Hawkins and his crew."\par
The tablet was broken in two during the scuffle. The pirates got away with the bigger half."\par
"Hawkins took my finest earring as well - I spit on his mother's grave!"\par
"Most likely they went to Buccaneer's Den with their loot."\par
"We took the corner of the tablet that they missed to the Lycaeum and sold it to Mariah."\par
hawk : "He's the lowest scum I ever met."\par
bucc,den : "It's no place for an honest soul like you."\par
"But if you're determined to go, I hear it's on an island due east of Paws."\par
paws : "We pass Paws often in our travels. Taynith likes to go drinking there."\par
lyca : "It's on the same island as Moonglow."\par
moon : "It's on the same island as the Lycaeum."\par
mari : "She knows how to be generous to poor wandering gypsies. You should follow her example!"\par
capt,john : "Captain John? I talked to him when he gave us the silver tablet for Mariah."\par
"He's madder than a gremlin! Claims as he's been living with the gargoyles."\par
"He talks as if there's nothing evil about them."\par
"He said the tablet had something to do with translating."\par
gorg : "Either you're a gorgio or my name's not Zoltan!"\par
kari,tayn : "There are no women like gypsy women!"\par
bye : If asked to dance : "Farewell! My fellow gypsies and I will dance to your health and good fortune!"\par
-or- : "Farewell."\par
danc : Karina produces a fiddle from somewhere and begins to play a tune at a very high tempo.\par
Zoltan dances a wild dance for you, leaping and capering about frantically.\par
His chest glistens with sweat as he walks up to you expectantly.\par
Do you give him any money?\par
no-"Hah! I should know better than to expect a gorgio to appreciate a fine gypsy dance."\par
Proudly, he turns his back on you.\par
yes-How much do you give?\par
If not enough gold : You don't have that much.\par
If have eenough gold : Zoltan pockets the money. "Thanks."\par
fine,magi,sale,sell,buy,good,item,inte,reag : "Which of you?"\par
"Which of these?"\par
"<Item Name> costs # per portion."\par
"How many do you want?"\par
If enough gold-<NPC Name> hands <Character Name> the <Item Name>\par
If can't carry enough-"You can't carry that much!"\par
"I'll just give you #."\par
If can't carry any-"You can't carry any!"\par
If not enough gold-"You can't afford that much!"\par
"I'll give you #."\par
If not enough gold for one-"You can't afford any $1!"\par
other : "Why worry yourself with that?"\par
Karina\par
Introduction : a gypsy girl poised on the verge of womanhood.\par
If mean to Kador : "How could you be so mean to Kador! You go and apologize to my poor little dog this instant!"\par
name : "My name is Karina." she says, looking shyly at the ground. "Do you think it's a pretty name?"\par
yes-"Thank you."\par
no-"Oh."\par
advi : "I have to ask you for a gold piece for my advice. Is that okay?"\par
no-"It was my father's idea!"\par
yes, no gold-"I'm sorry. I'm not supposed to help you unless you pay."\par
yes, have gold-"Ask our dog, Kador, to do some tricks for you. He knows lots of them!"\par
buy,sell : "I have nothing to sell you. Talk to my father."\par
job : "Father says I'm supposed to dance for gorgios."\par
gorg : "That's what we call anyone who isn't a gypsy."\par
gyps : "It's a nice life, but it gets lonely. I miss my sister."\par
sist, penu : "Her name is Penumbra. Have you any news of her?"\par
no-"If you do, please come tell me. I miss her so much..."\par
yes-"Oh! I'm so glad to hear she's okay!" She throws her arms around you and kisses you on the cheek.\par
fath,zolt : "He is Zoltan, king of the gypsies!"\par
king : "Well, that's what he says."\par
capt,john,silv,tabl,lyca : "Ask my father."\par
danc : "Oh, I just couldn't, not in front of so many people."\par
coul,fron,many,peop : "I'd be too embarassed!"\par
emba : "Well... Do you promise not to make fun of me?"\par
no-She turns away from you.\par
yes-Suddenly she starts dancing a dance of haunting beauty, to the sound of music that seems to emanate from nowhere.\par
It's one of the most wondrous sights you've ever seen.\par
After a timeless time, the music ceases, and she turns and runs away.\par
dog,kado : "He's such a sweet little doggie..."\par
bye : "Good bye, and sweet dreams to you."\par
other : "I can't help you with that."\par
Kador\par
Introduction : an amiable, shaggy mutt.\par
"Arf!"\par
-or- : "Bow wow."\par
-or- : The dog jumps up and tries to lick your face."\par
-or : "Woof, woof!"\par
If owe Kador money : The dog gets up and brings you his bowl again, looking at you expectantly.\par
name,job,capt,john,silv,tabl,sell : The dog looks at you with a puzzled expression on his face.\par
tric : The dog looks at you expectantly.\par
sit : The dog sits.\par
fetc : The dog fetches a stick and lays it at your feet.\par
shak : The dog shakes paws with you.\par
heel : The dog bites your heel.\par
beg : The dog begs.\par
play,dead : The dog plays dead.\par
roll,over : The dog rolls over.\par
spea,advi\par
"I feel that the whole debate over 'free will' versus 'determinism' arises from an artificial semantic division. In light of the work of Godel and Heisenberg, it is evident that the two concepts are indistinguishable and thus, for all practical purposes, identical."\par
artu,wand,andr : "Grrrrrrr..."\par
bye : "Ruff."\par
other : "Arf!"\par
-or- : "Bow wow."\par
-or- : The dog jumps up and tries to lick your face."\par
-or : "Woof, woof!"\par
The dog picks up a bowl in his mouth and holds it up to you.\par
You see that it has several coins in it already. Do you give him any money?\par
no-After a while the dog sets down the bowl, lies down, and starts whimpering.\par
yes-How much do you give?\par
have enough-You don't have that much.\par
don't have enough-The dog seems pleased.\par
Taynith\par
Introduction : a mysterious gypsy woman wearing an ankh pendant.\par
If at the Cat's Lair : "My chances to visit Dr. Cat come all too seldom."\par
"Seek me out later and I will speak with you."\par
If didn't tip Kador : "I have no time for those who are cruel to animals."\par
All other visits : "Welcome back, Avatar."\'a3"You are the Avatar. I had a vision that you would come to seek aid from me."\par
name : "Some know me as Taynith. That is what you may call me."\par
tayn,know,call,pati : "Seek not my true name. Let 'Taynith' suffice."\par
true : "You try my patience."\par
job,aid : "I tell fortunes - for a price."\par
tell,fort,sell,buy,pric,cons,tile,futu : "I charge six gold to cast my tiles. Are you interested?"\par
no-"Very well."\par
yes, no gold-"Best check your purse."\par
yes-From the folds of her cloak, she withdraws a velvet pouch.\par
After shaking it gently, she casts forth three small squares of ivory, each with an image etched into its surface and a title at the bottom.\par
The tiles are:\par
Random tiles : "If you consult the tiles another time, perhaps they will have more to say of your future."\par
'Panda', 'Coin', and 'Bead of Glass'.\par
Taynith says: "There is something made of glass that plays a very important role in your future, but the signs are unclear."\par
"Seek out Penumbra. Her crystal ball should hold more of an affinity for this item."\par
"If you pay her enough, she can tell you more than I."\par
'Abyss', 'Mountains', and 'Maelstrom'.\par
Taynith says: "This is strange."\par
"The tiles show that to accomplish your ends, you must go down very far, then up very far, but you will not end up back where you started."\par
"The 'Maelstrom' indicates something important as well, but I cannot determine what it means."\par
'Path', 'War', and 'Rogue'.\par
The 'War' tile is particularly striking. It depicts a dragon and a tiger, each about to bite the others tail.\par
Taynith says: "Britannia is on a path towards all out war, that is plain enough."\par
"The 'Rogue' is one who would go against the wishes of his Lord to find another path."\par
'Bead of Glass', 'Maelstrom', and 'Clever Fish'.\par
Taynith frowns. "I cannot interpret this pattern. I'm afraid you'll have to seek its meaning on your own."\par
'Shaman', 'Blademaster', and 'Clever Fish'.\par
Taynith says: "All of these things and more must you be to find success in your quest."\par
advi : "My advice will cost you two gold. Do you still want it?"\par
no-"Very well."\par
yes, no gold-"Best check your purse."\par
yes-"Look through the books at the Lycaeum. You might learn something useful there."\par
gorg : "A gorgio - that's almost as good as being a gypsy!"\par
bye : "Our paths will cross again. I have foreseen it."\par
capt,john : "Captain John? Yes, he brought us a silver tablet some time ago, to deliver to the Lycaeum."\par
"Zoltan took care of the deal, so he could tell you more than I."\par
silv,tabl,lyca : "Ask Zoltan about it."\par
zolt : "King of the gypsies, sure as my name's Taynith."\par
path : "My path leads to Paws, as soon as I have time to visit there."\par
paw : "My good friend Dr. Cat lives there."\par
frie,dr,cat : "Ask him about the duck sometime."\par
ask,duck : "Yes, ask him!"\par
lyca : "Zoltan can tell you where it is."\par
penu : If met Penumbra : "I sense that you have met her already."\par
If not met Penumbra : "There is no need for me to direct you there. You are destined to meet her."\par
other : "No doubt."\par
Blaine\par
Introduction : a slightly built gypsy lad.\par
If didn't tip dog : "Our dog did his best trick for you. You should show him some appreciation."\par
"Good <Time of Day>."\par
name : "I am called Blaine."\par
job : "I am a juggler. But I would fain join thee and go adventuring."\par
join,adve : Already in party : "I have joined you already!"\par
Not in party : "Do you want me to come with you?"\par
no-"Okay. Let me know if you need my help later."\par
yes, in boat-"Not while you're in that thing!"\par
yes, party full-"You have enough travelling with you already."\par
"If you ask one of them to leave first, I'd be happy to join you."\par
yes-"I look forward to the many adventures we will share."\par
leav : "I knew it! You don't really want to have a gypsy around."\par
"You wish me to leave you now, right?"\par
no-"Oh, pardon my mistake."\par
"It's just that we gypsies often have trouble finding acceptance among the gorgios."\par
"I'm very grateful that you've given me the chance to come along on your quest."\par
yes, on boat-"Let's get our feet back on solid ground first, okay?"\par
yes-"Fine. I'll be with my fellow gypsies if you change your mind."\par
"I suppose you'll be wanting to keep all this equipment."\par
He leaves everything he was carrying in a pile on the ground.\par
jugg : I charge five gold for juggling. Would you like to see some?"\par
no-"Perhaps some other time."\par
yes, but no gold-"Best check your purse."\par
yes, have gold-The gypsy juggler takes three wands out of his knapsack and sets their ends afire.\par
Tossing them into the air, he begins juggling.\par
The pattern is elaborate, almost hypnotic as the tips of the wands describe great flaming arcs and spirals through the air. \par
At regular intervals he tosses one around behind his back.\par
Yet somehow it always finds its way back into the pattern with the other two, without missing a beat.\par
At last he catches all three of the wands in one hand, waves them with a great flourish, and bows deeply before you.*\par
As he extinguishes the wands, he says "I hope you enjoyed the show."\par
advi : "My advice will cost you a gold coin. What do you say?"\par
no-"As you wish."\par
yes, but no gold-"Best check your purse."\par
yes, have gold-"Almost due east of Iolo's hut there lives a powerful enchanter."\par
buy,sell : "I don't have anything to sell just now. Check back with me next week."\par
bye : "Here's a little tune to lighten your step on the road ahead."\par
"Said the youthful earl to the gypsy girl,\par
As the moon was casting its silver shine:"\par
"Dear little lady, my gypsy lady,\par
Let me kiss those sweet lips of thine."\par
other : "I can't help you with that."\par
Sin'Vraal\par
Introduction : the daemon Sin'Vraal.\par
"Good <Time of Day>, <Gender>. What seek you?"\par
name : "I am Sin'Vraal."\par
job : "No job, <Gender>. I am free to wander where I wish."\par
free,wand : "Among my people, those who can fly rule."\par
"Though I have wings, I cannot fly. So I was a slave."\par
"Here I am free!"\par
peop,demo,your : "I am not a daemon, though humans think so."\par
"I am a gargoyle."\par
garg,ran,away : "I fled here to the Underworld because I was not free among the gargoyles."\par
book,prop,mari : "The Book of Prophecies says that the False Prophet will come to destroy the gargoyle race."\par
"Only the sacrifice of the False Prophet will save us."\par
read : "Because I could not fly, I was never taught to read."\par
sacr : "Sacrifice means many things in my language."\par
"You should seek out a gargoyle scholar to learn more."\par
"Travel the other side of the world, and you should be able to find one."\par
"You can go down through Hythloth to get to the realm of gargoyles."\par
fly : "There are two kinds of gargoyles: winged ones and wingless ones."\par
"Wingless ones are mute and unintelligent. They do all the manual labor."\par
"Winged ones are smart, and do all the planning and leading."\par
"Being able to fly is, to them, a sign of intelligence."\par
"Even the Temple can only be reached by air."\par
inte : "Yes, a strange concept this."\par
"Yet as some in Minoc can tell you, flying can be achieved by anyone."\par
temp : "The great Temple of Singularity held the Codex."\par
"The Temple is the most holy gargoyle place."\par
"A human could learn much by traveling there."\par
"But you could never get to the temple."\par
"Not only is it deep below the surface, but it can only be reached by flying."\par
"And you cannot fly any more than I can."\par
pira : "Yes, I once met a pirate here in the desert."\par
"He seemed to be hunting me, but he got dragged off by the ants!"\par
ants : "The great desert ants build huge mounds, and are very dangerous!"\par
bye : "May your persistence and precision lead to success, <Gender>!"\par
other : "I know nothing of <Last Input>, <Gender>."\par
Bonn\par
Introduction : a short, barefooted crazy man.\par
"At last! I knew you'd come to steal my shoes someday! But I was too smart for you!"\par
"You see, I HAVE NO SHOES!"\par
name : "A clever ploy, pretending to be friendly..."\par
"But if I told you my name was Bonn, then you could work foul magic to destroy my mind..."*\par
"I'll not fall for your tricks!"\par
bonn : "Who told you that? Alas, I am undone! I must flee!"\par
job,desp : "I have no job, nor shoes, nor any such thing."\par
"But I've learned from my misfortune, learned never to trust anyone, let alone to love."\par
stea,shoe : "I threw my shoes into the sea when I saw you coming!"\par
lear,trus,misf : "I trusted Hawkins once, and it led to nothing but despair."\par
hawk : "Oh how I envy him his peaceful sleep!"\par
live,deat,envy,peac,slee,luck,kill,die : "Death's embrace is the only true comfort a man can find in this world."\par
embr,comf : "A good chair is worth a thousand bumberchutes."\par
bumb : "Who told you about those? It's supposed to be a secret!"\par
worl : "Flat as a pancake, and twice as tasty!"\par
love : "Love is a slippery sled that flips over and pins you to the slope."\par
"And then, at night, the ice weasels come."\par
nigh,ice,weas : "If you're lucky, they'll kill you!"\par
bee,head : "The buzzing, they're always buzzing in my head."\par
mad,craz : "I can help you! I'm the only sane one left."\par
only,sane,left : "All the others LOST THEIR SHOES!"\par
help : "Go to the Shrine of Honesty, and stand just to the east of it."\par
"Take 3 steps north, 2 steps west, 5 steps south, and 4 steps east."\par
"Then eat some grapes, and all will become clear to you!"\par
shri,hone,clea,grap : "Mark my words!"\par
map : A strange light comes into his eyes. "The map? The secret treasure map?"\par
"I still have it, right here in my house. Do you want it?"\par
no-"Good! You can't have it anyway!"\par
yes-"Too bad! I've hidden it well, and it will go to my grave with me!"\par
"I'll die all the better for still having it!"\par
hous,grav : "I lived on the sea, and I'll die not far from it. Then my basement can be my tomb."\par
base,tomb : "Too well hidden for the likes of you to find!"\par
sea : "My shoes will be very happy there, dancing with the fishies!"\par
danc,fish : "They'll dance a waltz, I doubt it not!"\par
walt : "He begins laughing hysterically.\par
bye : "Farewell, sweet enemy. I love you more than my own death!"\par
secr : "You're not one of us!"\par
us : "We know who we are..."\par
we : "Me and the others."\par
othe : "By the time you find out, it will be too late!"\par
time,find,out,late : "I won't tell you because..."\par
other : "Sometimes the bees in my head almost drive me mad!"\par
Sionnach\par
Introduction : a troubadour with a drum. His tailored suit is travel-worn but bright.\par
If Avatar female, speaking to Sylaina : "Excuse me, ma'am. We are, um, indisposed." He returns his attentions to Sylaina.\par
If Avatar male, speaking to Sylaina : "Pardon me, sir, but I hate to keep my dear one waiting."\par
"You understand, of course." He returns his attentions to Sylaina.\par
Initial visit : "Greetings, folks." <Given Name>\par
Subsequent visits : "Why, hello there, my friend. You've grown a bit since we met last."\par
"I'm afraid I can't recall your name; you'll have to forgive me."\par
If Iolo in party : "It has been a while, Master Iolo."\par
name : "My name is Sionnach." (He pronounces it 'ShaNOK'.)\par
job : "I'm a drummer and a singer."\par
drum : Would you like me to play for you?"\par
no-"As you wish, <Given Name>."\par
yes-The drum is wide and flat. Sionnach holds it by the strings on the back of it.\par
Then, he taps it in intricate patterns using both ends of the dowel held loosely in his other hand.\par
It sounds thus: 'RUM-TE-TUM, RUM-TE-TUM, TUMBLETY-TUM-TE-TUM!'The beat is invigorating and exciting. "That's a battle summons."\par
batt,summ : "'Twas long ago... Back when men forced sorcerous secrets from demons..."\par
"Back when women wove moonbeams into cloth of indescribably fine texture..."\par
"Long ago, Lord Fennian devised a language of raps and knocks on the great drums used by his armies."\par
"Each drum was made of the entire skin of a bull, stretched taut by a dozen cords."\par
"It's true. I read that in a book I found at the Lycaeum."\par
book,lyca,read,foun : "I also read a number of maritime histories."\par
"They record the facts behind the many songs of different ships."\par
song,ship : "The sea is not always a gentle, generous friend."\par
"Storms have brought down many a haughty vessel: the evil Empire, the Dutchman, the Virtuous..."\par
"Have you heard of the Virtuous?"\par
dutc,empi : "I don't know where she rests. Ask other bards."\par
"There's probably great treasure on her, and on the Virtuous, too."\par
sing,virt : Sionnach sings softly for you.\par
"A southerner from Serpent's Hold\par
Once slew a pirate crew of eight.\par
Young Keegan was this warrior bold,\par
And thus he claimed the 'Bitter Kate.'"\par
"He broke a bottle 'cross her bow\par
And 'Virtuous' became her name.\par
For many years she served him well;\par
Good Captain Keegan rose to fame."\par
"The Barston Bay came north to fight,\par
The Jolly Roger on her mast.\par
To cold Loch Lake she sailed that night.\par
To sink Keegan's ship with cannon blast."\par
"Ah, the old Bitter Kate, she's mended her ways,\par
And as the Virtuous, ended her days."\par
"Captain Keegan, he sleeps the endless sleep\par
While on Loch Lake's shore the Virtuous lays."\par
bye : "Take care!"\par
other : "That I cannot help you with."\par
Mandrake\par
Introduction : a charming fellow with a peacock feather in his cap.\par
initial visit : "Welcome, welcome! 'Tis always a pleasure to see a new face."\par
"My name is Mandrake. And what may I call thee?"\par
"A pleasure, to be sure, <Given Name>. I hope I'll be seeing a lot more of you." He gives you a sly wink.\par
"Well met, sirrah!"\par
"You look like the sort who knows how to enjoy a good story."\par
subsequent visits : "<Avatar Name>! It's been too long. What brings you to this part of the realm?"\par
"Well, never mind that for the moment. Let me sing thee a song!"\par
name : "Mandrake, my friend, Mandrake. Like the root, but taller, handsomer, and louder."\par
root : "It grows in swamps, but I'm found mostly in taverns."\par
tall,hand,loud : "So I've heard."\par
tave : "I visit them all."\par
"The Fallen Virgin and the Sword and Keg are rowdy and rough."\par
"The Blue Bottle serves Frasier's Folly - the finest ale in all Britannia."\par
"But the Cat's Lair is still my favorite."\par
fras,foll : "You should try some! 'Twill do thee a world of good."\par
fall,virg : "'Tis in Buccaneer's Den - no place for the timid."\par
bucc,den : "If thou knowest not where it is, I'll not be the one to say."\par
swor,keg : "Over in Jhelom, it is. They always love a good brawl."\par
braw,jhel : "Lots of warriors there."\par
"They fight just about every night, but they don't mean anything by it. 'Tis all in fun."\par
blue,bott : "'Tis in Moonglow."\par
"Derydlus often drinks there - the man can put away more ale than any other I've met."\par
"Many's the time he's drunk me under the table."\par
moon : "Too honest a town to be much fun, but some fine people live there."\par
"You should have Penumbra tell your fortune sometime."\par
dery : "Give him my regards if you see him."\par
penu : "I hear she has strange powers."\par
stra,powe : "Yes, the gift of prophecy."\par
gift,prop : "So I hear."\par
cat,lair : "A wonderful place! Dr. Cat gives me free drinks just for singing."\par
"He loves games of all kinds too. Mention my name to him and he'll be sure to treat thee well."\par
job : "I travel all over to spread important @news throughout the realm - and tales and songs as well."\par
"If you have time enough, I'll favor you with all three."\par
trav,impo,news : "My travels were interrupted recently in a most fearsome manner."\par
"I was captured by the gargoyles, and taken down to the other side of the world, where they held me prisoner."\par
"But such was my good fortune that one of them helped me to escape."\par
"He spoke but little of our tongue, but I believe he said his name was 'Beh Lem.'"\par
garg : "I've seen their handiwork many a time in my travels."\par
"I believe they have taken over all of the shrines of the eight virtues."\par
eigh,virt : "Oh, you know: honesty, compassion, valour, justice, sacrifice, honor, spirituality, and humility."\par
"That's what you get for choosing such stuffy principles as a basis."\par
stuf,prin : "Truth, love and courage... hah!"\par
"If it had been up to me, I'd have chosen wine, women and song instead."\par
"Think of the virtues those would lead to!"\par
wine,wome,lead,thin : "I've thought it over..."\par
"The principles of wine, women and song would lead to the eight virtues of\par
drunkenness, sensuality, harmony, lust, laziness, dance, indulgence, and happiness."\par
"Now there would be the foundation for a fine world to live in!"\par
sing,song : "Would you care to donate a coin or two?"\par
no-"As you wish."\par
yes-How much do you give him?\par
Too much-You don't have that much.\par
Have enough-"Thank you kindly."\par
"Ok, here we go!"\par
"The dragon is a scaly sort\par
Who spouts flame when he sneezes.\par
Many a bold knight has he fought,\par
For he goes where e'er he pleases."\par
"Mister Porcupine's naught but spines,\par
To the dismay of him and his missus.\par
For that for which he truly pines\par
Is one of her sweet kisses."\par
"A gypsy girl and a butterfly\par
Were out in the woods at play\par
And when I saw them I said 'Oh my!\par
What a perfect sunny day!'"\par
tale,stor : "Perhaps my stories would be worth a few coins?"\par
no-"As you wish."\par
yes-How much do you give him?\par
Not Enough-You don't have that much.\par
Have enough-"You're too kind."\par
Mandrake tells you tales for quite a while, yet listening to them you lose track of time.\par
He tells you of ships sailing off the edge of the world, of earthquakes, and mad wizards, and fierce battles.\par
He speaks of spells that halt the flow of time, a man who found a way to fly, and the strange secret of the wisps.\par
He tells you that there are two bands of gypsies who travel the King's Way, who are often mistaken for each other.\par
He speaks of the pirate ship Empire, which was much dreaded in its day, and of the giant ants that can be found in the Dry Land.\par
Your head is filled with wondrous visions.\par
But finally\par
If Dupre in party : he notices that Dupre has begun to doze off, and decides to bring his tales to an end.\par
If Dupre not in party : his tales come to an end.\par
bye : "Leaving so soon, <Given Name>? And I was enjoying your company so." He bows and kisses your hand.\par
"Well, <Avatar Name>, I'm glad you stopped by to chat with me. We must do it again sometime."\par
"I'll be glad to play another song for you when next we meet."\par
other : "I'll tell you of that later, perhaps."\par
-or- : "Oh, why bother with such a boring subject? How about a song instead?"\par
"I sing better if I keep my belly full, and my wineskin as well."\par
other : "Maybe I can talk to you about that after I get out of these stocks."\par
Phoenix (NPC)\par
Introduction : a graceful, silver haired woman in robes of blue.\par
She eyes you suspiciously. "What do you want?"\par
name : "I am Phoenix."\par
job : I used to be captain of the Black Thechu."\par
"But now I'm a member of the thieves guild, and I don't care who knows it."\par
"Britain is the wealthiest city in the world, and I make a tidy living sneaking up there at night to 'liberate' a few possessions."\par
"Of course, I only steal from those who have too much wealth for their own good."\par
libe,stea,thie : "It's an honorable profession, with as long a tradition as any other."\par
capt,blac,thec : "She was the finest ship that ever sailed. But those days are past."\par
"The crew's scattered to the four corners of the earth, and the Thechu's off amongst the stars."\par
crew,star : "We were at port one day when the anchor chain snapped, and the Thechu drifted off the edge of the world."\par
"I'd join her if I could, and sail through space..."\par
four,corn,eart,edge,worl : "The world is flat, you know." She eyes you appraisingly.\par
"Surely any well educated person would be aware of that."\par
belt : "You want my belt? I'm sorry, lass/laddy, but I'm not ready to retire just yet."\par
reti : "No way! I'm making too good a living to give it up now."\par
"If you want to get my belt, use your wits. Prove you're worthy to replace me."\par
wit,prov,wort,repl : "Figure it out yourself."\par
guil : "If you want to join the guild, go talk to Budo about it."\par
budo : "He lives in Buccaneer's Den."\par
"These tunnels can take you there - unless you get lost, or the rats get you..."\par
bucc,den : "The rumors of pirates there are just idle chatter."\par
She smiles. "I haven't been there in a while. It's a lovely little town..."\par
chat : "I don't know about you, but some of us have more important things to do with our time."\par
pira : "Pirates? I'm sure I wouldn't know a thing about them."\par
bye : "About time you were on your way. One thing before you go..." She draws her dagger.\par
"Don't tell anyone where my hideout is. If you do, some night you'll go to sleep and never wake up again."\par
"You'll never know when it's coming."\par
"She turns and throws the dagger at a little mouse that was sniffing around for food, pinning it to the wall by its tail.\par
If Sherry in party : "Eeeeek!" Sherry runs up your leg, and it takes several minutes before you can coax her back down again.\par
other : "I haven't got all day to stand around talking. Get to the point, or go bother someone else."\par
Captain John\par
Introduction : a long-haired gentleman with a scholarly demeanor.\par
Subsequent visits : "Ah, my good friend! Thou hast returned!"\par
Initial visit : "Praise the virtues! Humans have arrived here at last!"\par
"But what's this? Not just any humans--the Avatar!"\par
"'Tis most fortuitous that thou hast returned, noble <Avatar Name>."\par
"Many cataclysms have occurred since thou last visited Britannia!"\par
name : "Why, I'm Captain John, <Avatar Name>!"\par
job : "For several years I have been here in the catacombs, studying the gargoyles."\par
stud : "Yes, I have learned much about them!"\par
garg : "They are not evil, as most humans believe!"\par
"I have spent much time talking to them, and I have found them to be almost human."\par
"I have learned about their society, their beliefs and their language."\par
know,worl,cata : "The gargoyle world, once as large as Britannia itself, is slowly being destroyed!"\par
"The forces thou set in motion have caused great sections of their land to fall off into the void!"\par
"Only a single gargoyle city remains."\par
city : "The gargoyle City of Investigation, their place of learning and government, is all that is left."\par
"Thou must do something to save the gargoyle race!"\par
"I know not what, however."\par
"Thou must talk to the gargoyles."\par
soci : "There are two kinds of gargoyles, winged and wingless ones."\par
"At first it seemed as if the wingless ones were slaves."\par
"But now I know that the wingless ones are beloved and valued family members."\par
"They must be told what to do, because they are not truly intelligent."\par
"The gargoyles live honorably, by their own set of beliefs."\par
beli : "The gargoyles' beliefs are much like our own."\par
"Where we have the three principles of Truth, Love and Courage, they have the principles of Control, Passion and Diligence."\par
"Directly, these lead to the virtues of Direction, Feeling, and Persistence."\par
"Combined, they lead to Balance, Achievement and Precision."\par
"Taken all together, they point to Order."\par
"And the sum of all the principles is Singularity."\par
"Gargoyle society stresses unity and singularity in all things."\par
"They have to; their world has always been harsh, even before the cataclysms."\par
lang,talk : "With the help of a gargoyle child, Beh Lem, I have learned how to speak their language."\par
"Wouldst thou like to learn?"\par
no-"But you must!"\par
"Thou hast no chance of saving the gargoyles if thou knowest not their language!"\par
yes-"I had a silver tablet that contained much of what I had learned."\par
"I gave it to some gypsies to take to Mariah, at the Lycaeum."\par
"Did it arrive safely?"\par
yes-"Good! I am glad to know that the gypsies kept their word."\par
"That tablet must have amazed Mariah!"\par
no-"No?! But I paid money, good money, for them to carry it to her!"\par
"No matter. Now that thou art here, all is well."\par
"You can study the gargoyles yourself, and carry the knowledge back to the surface!"\par
"Here." He hands you a scroll."\par
"Use this scroll; it contains a basic vocabulary of the Gargoyle language."\par
beh,lem : "He and I meet every day at noon, where Hythloth emerges in the gargoyle lands."\par
"Go and speak with him, learn about the gargoyles."\par
"You must save them!"\par
join : "No, I cannot. I must stay here and continue my writing."\par
"But Beh Lem may join thee."\par
"With his help, thou canst travel the gargoyle lands and learn how to save them."\par
bye : "Farewell again, noble Avatar."\par
"As the gargoyles say, 'May thy persistence and precision lead to success.'"\par
"Upon you rests the future of an entire race."\par
If haven't learned about Beh Lem : "Wait!"\par
"Thou must meet Beh Lem and travel with him among the gargoyle people."\par
"That is the only way you can save them, and save them you must!"\par
"And without Beh Lem with you, the gargoyles will attack!"\par
other : "Oh, the things I could say of that!"\par
"But we have not the time."\par
"When both worlds have been saved, then we can discuss such matters."\par
Daros\par
Introduction : a skinny, awkward looking man, wearing boots that come up past his knees.\par
"Hey hey hey! Welcome to the finest sewers in Britannia."\par
"You look like you need a nickname, so I'll call you 'ducks.'"\par
name : "My name's Daros, old duck." He shakes your hand.\par
job : "Well, ducky, I keep the sewers running the way they should."\par
"When work is slow, sometimes I play a joke or two on my friends to keep things lively." He winks at you.\par
frie : "Even though we don't know each other that well, I'd like to think of you as my friend already."\par
play,joke : "Oh you know, ducks, the usual kinds." He nudges you in the ribs.\par
sewe,work : "Britain is the biggest city in the world, and all those people use a lot of water."\par
"All the runoff drains down here. It's not a bad place to work, really, except for the @rats."\par
rat : "They're pretty big, ducky, but not to worry."\par
"They usually won't eat you until after they've killed you first."\par
"Of course, if you have a set of panpipes, I hear you can just pipe them away..."\par
pan,pipe : "I don't have a set myself. I usually just run away."\par
run,away : "It's real good exercise!"\par
wate,runo,drai : "I wouldn't go swimming around here, ducks."\par
brit : "Go back up and have a look! I'm sure it's still there."\par
He grins, obviously delighted with his own sense of humor.\par
bye : "See you around, old duck."\par
He gives you a hearty slap on the back as you leave, which almost knocks one of the straps on your pack loose.\par
other : "That's not something I talk about much, down here..."\par
Ybarra\par
Introduction : a sunken-faced, starving man, dressed in rags.\par
subsequent visits : "Thou art back!"\par
"Please, please! Give me some food!"\'b0\par
initial visit : It takes a few moments for the man to notice you.\par
"Hu--humans!"\par
"Please, you must help me!" he says weakly.\par
"I need food, badly!"\par
name : "Ybarra. Ybarra's my name."\'b0\par
job : "Lost here, no job now."\par
"I used to sail under Captain Hawkins on the Empire."\par
"We had food then!"\par
"But those days are gone...."\'b0\par
food : "Yes, food! The last thing I ate was my belt."\par
"And that was three weeks ago."\par
"If only you could give me some food..."\par
belt : "Not very tasty, but it was filling."\'b0\par
give,spar : If have food : "Thunff fou," Ybarra says, stuffing the food into his mouth.\par
"After finishing the offered meal, however, Ybarra still seemes starved."\par
If don't have food : "Suddenly, you realize that you have no food to give him!\par
"No food?" he asks. "Then thou art doomed too!"\par
map,piec : "Map? Map. Map."\par
If have map : "You already got it from me."\par
If don't have map : "Oh, the map. Yes, I still have that."\par
"I couldn't eat it."\par
"It ought to be worth some food, surely?"\par
yes-"He hands you the map piece and rubs his hands, eagerly awaiting his food."\par
no-"You must! I'll die! Just a little bit of food for the map?" "His last shred of hope torn away from him, the withered man leaps at you, screaming "Food! Food!"\par
join : Leave here? No!"\par
"I've almost gotten the tunnels figured out!"\par
"Just a few more days and I'll be free!"\par
"But I must have food!"\'b0\par
bye : "Don't go! I need food... food..."\par
"Can I have a little before you go?" \par
no-"The man collapses, the last of his energy gone."\par
other : "Huh?"\par
Wisp\par
Introduction : a strange, glowing ball of energy.\par
"Again, 'you' of this plane address 'I' of the Xorinite dimension."\par
"By what name do 'you' wish to be addressed at this time?"\par
"Very well, '<Given Name>' Do 'you' have memory of previous discussions with 'myself?'"\par
yes-"Good. Tedious repetition should then be unnecessary on this occasion. Of what would 'you' speak?"\par
no-"So be it. 'I' must often repeat information when conversing with the life of Britannia, it seems."\par
"'I' do not see how each unit of life here can have different memories, different desires, but again 'I' inform Britannia that it is not so in 'my' realm."\par
"Those which 'you' know as 'wisp' in Britannia are projections of the life of Xorinia."\par
"'I' extend into many planes beside this one."\par
"Britannia communicates with 'me' very seldom, and is known by those of very few other planes."\par
"Every time 'I' speak with Britannia, it seems 'I' must explain 'my' nature again, as 'I' have just done."\par
"That is very strange."\par
name : The concept of 'name' is one 'I' still do not grasp."\par
"'I' believe that when 'you' ask 'me' to use '<Given Name>' as a form of address, it has something to do with 'name.'"\par
"When Britannia addressed me with the name 'Zog,' an attempt was made to explain."\par
"But still 'I' do not understand."\'b0\par
you : 'I' and 'you' are words that seem to have no meaning."\par
"'I' mimic the way 'you' use them in this language out of courtesy."\par
job : Xorinia serves as a conduit for information between different planes."\par
"In exchange, these planes provide information that can be used to improve Xorinia."\par
"Occasionally payment is accepted in the form of substance, but this is not preferred."\par
cond,info,exch : Britannia has never participated in the interplanar exchange of information."\par
"'I' have presented a sample known in Britannian terms as a 'secret', but no further interest has been shown."\par
subs : Actual physical materials are so plentiful throughout the multiverse that they are of little value."\par
"Information has much greater worth."\par
paym,inte : If 'you' present a reasonably dense information source to a 'wisp' unit, arrangements will be made to transfer some suitably valuable commodity into Britannian possession."\par
secr : Because of the nature of Britannian memory, 'I' now present the sample information to 'you' again."\par
The wisp pulsates, fading from blue to white, then back to blue again.\par
As it does so, a scroll materializes in your hand.\par
"This is a simple invocation of magic energy to bring about the cessation of all life."\par
"It is not a very useful or powerful form of magic, as it will only affect beings in the same plane where it is invoked." "Inform any 'wisp' unit if 'you' have interest in further exchange.\'b0\par
zog : Once when 'I' offered sample information to Britannia, the name 'Zog' was given by the life unit that received it."\par
"No further contact with Britannia was obtainable for some time after this."\par
"Perhaps misuse of the sample information was responsible."\par
bye : 'I' find it unusual that 'you' find it so important to inform 'me' of the imminent cessation of proximity between one unit of Britannian life and one of Xorinite."\par
"Nonetheless, in accordance with 'your' custom:\par
Goodbye, '<Given Name>'"\par
other : "The vagaries of the language 'you' speak are quite beyond 'me.'"\par
If have book of mantras : "Perhaps another line of inquiry would prove more 'fruitful.'"\par
"The volume 'you' bear with the symbol pattern representing the sounds 'The Book of Lost Mantras' is a prime source of high density information."\par
"Do 'you' wish to 'me' to locate a client who is willing to make an exchange for it at this time?"\par
no-"The ways of Britannia are strange indeed."\par
yes-For a few moments, the wisp pulses, saying nothing.\par
"It is done," the wisp says at last, "Rklbwm have expressed desire to possess this information."\par
"Hoping, no doubt, for a bargain, Rklbwm have offered a small quantity of the substance 'gold' in lieu of the customary useful information."\par
"But surely 'you' wish 'me' to arrange for Rklbwm to provide information of value to 'you.'"\par
"Am 'I' correct to assume this?"\par
yes-"Then so be it. Here is useful information from the Rklbwm:"\par
'If a substance with a partially reflective surface is positioned so that its third index of refraction matches the wavelength coefficient of the output of a polarized light source, and the resulting beam is focused on an ionized crystal suspended in a unipolar magnetic field, matter can be converted into useful electromagnetic radiation at an efficiency rate of 96 to 98 percent, depending on the desired output frequency.'* "It was a pleasure doing business with you."\par
no-"Very well."\par
"'You' have not sent enough life units to transport much substance, but it is 'your' decision to make."\par
The wisp glows just a trifle brighter for a moment, and suddenly everyone notices that their packs have grown heavier.\par
"It was a pleasure doing business with you."\par
Guard\par
Introduction : A muscular, well armored guard.\par
"Hello. Can I help you with something?"\par
yes-"Well, what can I help you with?"\par
name : "I'm not allowed to give out that information."\par
job : "I am one of Lord British's elite guards. We keep order throughout Britannia."\par
brit : "Hail Lord British! Hail Britannia! Hail the glorious Avatar!"\par
elit,guar,keep,orde : "Lately our ranks have thinned. Many have been lost in the war against the gargoyles."\par
rank,thin,many,lost,garg : Few of us are left to patrol the cities, and those may be sent to the shrines soon."\par
"I fear we may lose this war."\par
shri,lose,fear,sent : Not a single shrine have we liberated. The gargoyles fight like daemons!"\par
demo,daem : "I have noticed a certain resemblance..."\par
patr,citi : "That is our only job, in times of peace."\par
time,peac : "May we see such times again!"\par
bye : "If that is all, then I'll be back about my duties."\par
other : "Perhaps you should ask somebody else."\par
Shrines\par
\par
Mondain\par
Introduction : a stone statue of the evil wizard Mondain.\par
Subsequent visits : "For what dost thou return, Avatar?"\par
Initial visit : You remember as if it were yesterday how you defeated Mondain in your first visit to Brittania.\par
Using the four stones, you went back in time to smash his power-gem.\par
The statue speaks!\par
"We meet again, Avatar."\par
"Fear not! I have but one task now, and am no threat."\par
name : "Surely you of all people would recognize me as Mondain."\par
job,task : "The gargoyles have enshrined my spirit here as the embodiment of control.\par
cont,mant : "I was once a mighty wizard."\par
"Control was the essence of my soul--control of self and control of others."\par
"But desire for more control overcame me."\par
"I forsook my self-control in my hunger for conquest."\par
"Control must start with the self and expand outward."\par
"The strong must lead. But to be strong one must control oneself first."\par
"The gargoyles understand control."\par
"Their society is based on the strong guiding the weak."\par
"In this way, they survive in their harsh world."\par
bye : If understand : "Farewell, Avatar."\par
"May thy control help you succeed in thy quest."\par
If don't understand : "Thou wilt need control of others to succeed in thy quest, Avatar."\par
"But thou wilt most of all need control of thyself to be worthy"\par
other : "I have no concern for matters such as <Last Input>"\par
-or- : "I am enshrined here in eternal contemplation of the principle of control."\par
"Contemplate what thou hast learned. Repeat after me the Mantra of Control."\par
Un.... \par
Un.... \par
Un.... \par
un : "I can teach thee no more."\par
"Thy understanding is flawed. But I can teach thee no more."\par
"But thou wilt most of all need a clear vision of thy goal to be worthy."\par
Based upon karma level : "Thy deeds show a lack of control"\par
"Thy deeds show a need for more control"\par
"Thy deeds show understanding of control"\par
"I admire thy deeds and thy control"\par
Minax\par
Introduction : a stone statue of the evil witch Minax.\par
Subsequent visits : "For what dost thou return, Avatar?"\par
Initial visit : You remember quite clearly how you defeated Minax in your second visit to Brittania.\par
With a mighty sword blow, you slew the witch and destroyed her evil works.\par
The statue speaks!\par
"We meet again, Avatar."\par
"Fear not! I have but one task now, and am no threat."\par
name : "Surely you of all people would recognize me as Minax."\par
job,task : "The gargoyles have enshrined my spirit here as the embodiment of passion.\par
pass,mant : "I was once a mighty sorceress."\par
"Passion was the essence of my soul."\par
"But that passion knew no bounds."\par
"I wanted everything, and because of this strove to conquer all."\par
"Passion must be directed, focused."\par
"Unbridled passion, desire for all things, leads only to chaos."\par
"The gargoyles understand passion."\par
"Their society is based on the passionate leading those who lack motivation."\par
"In this way, they have the will to struggle against their harsh world."\par
bye : If understand : "Farewell, Avatar."\par
"May thy passion drive thy quest toward success."\par
If don't understand : "Thou wilt need passion to succeed in thy quest, Avatar."\par
"But thou must limit thy passion, lest balance and order be lost."\par
other : "I have no concern for matters such as <Last Input>"\par
-or- : "I am enshrined here in eternal contemplation of the principle of passion."\par
"Contemplate what thou hast learned. Repeat after me the Mantra of Passion."\par
Or.... \par
Or.... \par
Or.... \par
or : "I can teach thee no more."\par
"Thy understanding is flawed. But I can teach thee no more."\par
"But thou wilt most of all need a clear vision of thy goal to be worthy."\par
Based upon karma level : "Thy deeds show nought but unlimited passion"\par
"Thy deeds show misguided but strong passion"\par
"Thy deeds show the merits of thy passion"\par
"I admire thy deeds and thy passion"\par
Exodus\par
Introduction : a stone statue of the evil Exodus.\par
Subsequent visits : "For what dost thou return, Avatar?"\par
Initial visit : You still remember vividly how you defeated Exodus in your third visit to Brittania.\par
Using the four cards, you tricked the accursed machine into destroying itself.\par
The statue speaks!\par
"We meet again, Avatar."\par
"Fear not! I have but one task now, and am no threat."\par
name : "Though I no longer bear the form of the machine you destroyed, yet still am I Exodus."\par
job,task : "The gargoyles have enshrined my spirit here as the embodiment of diligence."\par
dili,mant : "I was once a powerful daemon."\par
"Diligence was the essence of my soul--cold, unswerving diligence in my path of conquest."\par
"But in my devotion to achievement I lost sight of my original goals."\par
"Diligence without a goal is as worthless as a goal without diligence."\par
"The means cannot replace the end, and diligence cannot be the goal."\par
"The gargoyles understand diligence."\par
"Their society is based on the diligent leading the wayward."\par
"In this way, they maintain their fight for survival in their harsh world."\par
bye : If understand : "Farewell, Avatar."\par
"May thy diligence maintain thee on thy quest."\par
If don't understand : "Thou wilt need diligence to succeed in thy quest, Avatar."\par
other : "I have no concern for matters such as <Last Input>"\par
-or- : "I am enshrined here in eternal contemplation of the principle of diligence."\par
"Contemplate what thou hast learned. Repeat after me the Mantra of Diligence."\par
Us.... \par
Us.... \par
Us.... \par
us : "I can teach thee no more."\par
"Thy understanding is flawed. But I can teach thee no more."\par
"But thou wilt most of all need a clear vision of thy goal to be worthy."\par
Based upon karma level : "Thy deeds show a lack of diligence"\par
"Thy deeds show misguided diligence"\par
"Thy deeds show the value of thy diligence"\par
"I admire thy deeds and thy diligence"\par
Shrine of Honesty\par
Introduction : the altar of Honesty.\par
As you kneel before the altar, a mystical voice sounds in your head.\par
If karma low : "Thou hast much to learn about honesty."\par
If karma OK : "Thy deeds have shown admirable honesty."\par
-or- : "Thy deeds serve as an example to all."\par
Do you wish to meditate at this altar?\par
no-end conversation\par
yes-"Who will meditate?"\par
"Speak the Mantra of Honesty."\par
"<Mantra>... <Mantra>..."\par
"<Mantra>... <Mantra>..."\par
"<Mantra>... <Mantra>..."\par
ahm : "Whatsoever things are true..."\par
"Whatsoever things are honest..."\par
"If there be any virtue and if there be any praise, think on these things."\par
If not ready to gain a level : "You receive no enlightenment.\par
If ready to gain a level : <Player Name> has gained a level...\par
and intelligence!\par
"There is naught else for you to learn here and now."\par
"Return when thy journey has progressed further."\par
Shrine of Compassion\par
Introduction : the altar of Compassion.\par
As you kneel before the altar, a mystical voice sounds in your head.\par
If karma low : "Thou hast much to learn about compassion."\par
If karma OK : "Thy deeds have shown admirable compassion."\par
-or- : "Thy deeds serve as an example to all."\par
Do you wish to meditate at this altar?\par
no-end conversation\par
yes-"Who will meditate?"\par
"Speak the Mantra of Compassion."\par
"<Mantra>... <Mantra>..."\par
"<Mantra>... <Mantra>..."\par
"<Mantra>... <Mantra>..."\par
mu : "No beast so fierce but shows some touch of pity."\par
"Sweet mercy is nobility's true badge."\par
If not ready to gain a level : "You receive no enlightenment.\par
If ready to gain a level : <Player Name> has gained a level...\par
and dexterity!\par
"There is naught else for you to learn here and now."\par
"Return when thy journey has progressed further."\par
Shrine of Valor\par
Introduction : the altar of Valor.\par
As you kneel before the altar, a mystical voice sounds in your head.\par
If karma low : "Thou hast much to learn about valor."\par
If karma OK : "Thy deeds have shown admirable valor."\par
-or- : "Thy deeds serve as an example to all."\par
Do you wish to meditate at this altar?\par
no-end conversation\par
yes-"Who will meditate?"\par
"Speak the Mantra of Valor."\par
"<Mantra>... <Mantra>..."\par
"<Mantra>... <Mantra>..."\par
"<Mantra>... <Mantra>..."\par
ra : "Tender-handed stroke a nettle, and it stings you for your pains."\par
"Grasp it as a man of mettle, and it soft as silk remains"\par
If not ready to gain a level : "You receive no enlightenment.\par
If ready to gain a level : <Player Name> has gained a level...\par
and strength!\par
"There is naught else for you to learn here and now."\par
"Return when thy journey has progressed further."\par
Shrine of Justice\par
Introduction : the altar of Justice.\par
As you kneel before the altar, a mystical voice sounds in your head.\par
If karma low : "Thou hast much to learn about justice."\par
If karma OK : "Thy deeds have shown admirable justice."\par
-or- : "Thy deeds serve as an example to all."\par
Do you wish to meditate at this altar?\par
no-end conversation\par
yes-"Who will meditate?"\par
"Speak the Mantra of Justice."\par
"<Mantra>... <Mantra>..."\par
"<Mantra>... <Mantra>..."\par
"<Mantra>... <Mantra>..."\par
beh : "Justice without force is impotent."\par
"Force without justice is tyranny."\par
If not ready to gain a level : "You receive no enlightenment.\par
If ready to gain a level : <Player Name> has gained a level...\par
intelligence...\par
and dexterity!\par
"There is naught else for you to learn here and now."\par
"Return when thy journey has progressed further."\par
Shrine of Sacrifice\par
Introduction : the altar of Sacrifice.\par
As you kneel before the altar, a mystical voice sounds in your head.\par
If karma low : "Thou hast much to learn about sacrifice."\par
If karma OK : "Thy deeds have shown admirable sacrifice."\par
-or- : "Thy deeds serve as an example to all."\par
Do you wish to meditate at this altar?\par
no-end conversation\par
yes-"Who will meditate?"\par
"Speak the Mantra of Sacrifice."\par
"<Mantra>... <Mantra>..."\par
"<Mantra>... <Mantra>..."\par
"<Mantra>... <Mantra>..."\par
cah : The universe is so vast and so ageless\par
that the life of one man can only be justified\par
by the measure of his sacrifice.\par
If not ready to gain a level : "You receive no enlightenment.\par
If ready to gain a level : <Player Name> has gained a level...\par
strength...\par
and dexterity!\par
"There is naught else for you to learn here and now."\par
"Return when thy journey has progressed further."\par
Shrine of Honor\par
Introduction : the altar of Honor.\par
As you kneel before the altar, a mystical voice sounds in your head.\par
If karma low : "Thou hast much to learn about honor."\par
If karma OK : "Thy deeds have shown admirable honor."\par
-or- : "Thy deeds serve as an example to all."\par
Do you wish to meditate at this altar?\par
no-end conversation\par
yes-"Who will meditate?"\par
"Speak the Mantra of Honor."\par
"<Mantra>... <Mantra>..."\par
"<Mantra>... <Mantra>..."\par
"<Mantra>... <Mantra>..."\par
summ : "Honor may be assailed, but can never be hurt."\par
"Surprised by unjust force"\par
If not ready to gain a level : "You receive no enlightenment.\par
If ready to gain a level : <Player Name> has gained a level...\par
strength...\par
and intelligence!\par
"There is naught else for you to learn here and now."\par
"Return when thy journey has progressed further."\par
Shrine of Spirituality\par
Introduction : the altar of Spirituality.\par
As you kneel before the altar, a mystical voice sounds in your head.\par
If karma low : "Thou hast much to learn about spirituality."\par
If karma OK : "Thy deeds have shown admirable spirituality."\par
-or- : "Thy deeds serve as an example to all."\par
Do you wish to meditate at this altar?\par
no-end conversation\par
yes-"Who will meditate?"\par
"Speak the Mantra of Spirituality."\par
"<Mantra>... <Mantra>..."\par
"<Mantra>... <Mantra>..."\par
"<Mantra>... <Mantra>..."\par
om : "Throughout this varied and eternal world, soul is the only element."\par
"The wealth of the spirit is the only true wealth."\par
If not ready to gain a level : "You receive no enlightenment.\par
If ready to gain a level : <Player Name> has gained a level...\par
intelligence...\par
strength...\par
and dexterity!\par
"There is naught else for you to learn here and now."\par
"Return when thy journey has progressed further."\par
Shrine of Humility\par
introduction : the altar of Humility.\par
As you kneel before the altar, a mystical voice sounds in your head.\par
If karma low : "Thou hast much to learn about humility."\par
If karma OK : "Thy deeds have shown admirable humility."\par
-or- : "Thy deeds serve as an example to all."\par
Do you wish to meditate at this altar?\par
no-end conversation\par
yes-"Who will meditate?"\par
"Speak the Mantra of Humility."\par
"<Mantra>... <Mantra>..."\par
"<Mantra>... <Mantra>..."\par
"<Mantra>... <Mantra>..."\par
lum : The humblest citizen of all the land, when clad in the armor of a righteous cause, is stronger than all the hosts of error."\par
If not ready to gain a level : You receive no enlightenment.\par
If ready to gain a level : <Player Name> has gained a level!\par
"There is naught else for you to learn here and now."\par
"Return when thy journey has progressed further."\par
Temple of Singularity\par
introduction : a finely-carved stone pyramid.\par
As you face the altar, a voice rings in your head.\par
You understand it perfectly, but you can't recognize the language!\par
If already solved quest : "There is no more wisdom for thee to acquire here, noble Avatar."\par
"Seek the Codex, and may nothing impede thy sacred quest!"\par
Subsequent visit if given quest : "Hast thou completed thy journey to the catacombs?"\par
yes-What is the Mantra of Singularity?"\par
yes, but low karma-"Thy deeds make thee unworthy of enlightenment."\par
no-"Return when thy path is more focused."\par
"Thou hast far to travel and much to achieve, but thy inner fire will surely guide thy way."\par
-or- : "Thou hast far to travel and much to achieve."\par
"May the wisdom imparted here help purify thy inner flame."\par
"Look deep inside thyself, Avatar, and answer this:"\par
"For whom dost thou truly seek the Codex?"\par
cont,dili,pass : "<Last input> is one of the guiding principles of the gargoyle race."\par
"Go thou into the Catacombs of <Control, Diligence, Passion>, near the coast to the <west, south, east> of here."\par
"There you will find the being who most exemplifies this principle."\par
prin,thre : "The three principles of Control, Passion and Diligence form the basis of the gargoyle way of life."\'b0\par
name,job : Thou hast reached the Altar of Singularity. What dost thou seek?"\par
cata : Which catacomb dost thou seek?"\par
bye The mystic voice falls silent, and you leave the altar.\par
other : "The answer to that lies elsewhere."\par
-or- : "The answer to that lies within thyself."\par
"What do you seek, Avatar?"\par
sacr,ques,code,mant : "What is the Mantra of Singularity?"\par
un-or-us,unorus : "Let the principle of control guide thy quest."\par
"Let the principle of passion drive thy quest." "Let the principle of diligence maintain thy quest." "Then wilt thou truly achieve the unified spirit and singularity of purpose that is necessary for success in all endeavors." "This is the gargoyle way; let it be thy way as well." The altar glows with a cold blue flame. You feel compelled to seek out the Codex. Your final quest has begun!\par
un-us-or,us-un-or,us-or-un,or-us-un,or-un-us,unusor,usunor,usorun,orusun,orunus : You have not yet become familiar with the wisdom of the gargoyle race."\par
"Continue thy search."\par
"Think again, Avatar: For whom dost thou seek the Codex?"\par
both,our,peac,all,ever : Thy answer is wise."\par
"But how canst thou truly work for the good of a race whose ways thou dost not understand?"\par
"Go thou into the Catacombs of Control, Passion and Diligence."\par
"In each wilt thou find the final resting place of the being who most exemplifies that principle."\par
"Return when thou hast found these catacombs."\par
huma,me,my,lord,brit : Thy answer is foolish."\par
"A journey made for selfish reasons can never be a sacred quest, regardless of its goal."\par
garg,seer,scho,inqu,lead : Thy answer is foolish."\par
"There is no nobility or honor in betraying one's own race for the sake of another."\par
"Such a path can never be a sacred quest."\par
valk,beh,naxa,drax,bole : Thy answer is foolish."\par
"Thy compassion is acknowledged, but compassion is not the key to success."\par
"The motive must be as one with the goal for a journey to become a sacred quest."\par
bye : "Return when thou canst truly answer this question."\par
other : "Thy answer is foolish."\par
"Thy mind must be focused clearly on thy path for thy journey to become a sacred quest."\par
\par
}
 